#001 Diagnosis and Treatment of Terminal Delirium, 2nd ed Author(s): David E Weissman MD Background : Some degree of loss of cognitive function occurs in most patients in the week or two before death. The typical scenario presented to housestaff is a late-night call from a ward nurse saying, “Mr. Jones is confused, what should we do”. This Fast Fact reviews assessment and management issues in terminal delirium. Key teaching points: The term “confusion” is not an accurate descriptive term—it can mean anything from delirium, dementia, psychosis, obtundation, etc. Patients need a focused assessment, including a brief mini-mental examination. Clinicians should use one of several validated delirium assessment tools to help quantify and document cognitive function. Delirium can be either a hyperactive /agitated delirium or a hypoactive delirium. The hallmark of delirium is an acute change in the level of arousal; supporting features include altered sleep/wake cycle, mumbling speech, disturbance of memory and attention, and perceptual disturbances with delusions and hallucinations. The most common identifiable cause of delirium in the hospital setting is drugs: anti-cholinergics (e.g. anti-secretion drugs, anti-emetics, anti-histamines, tricyclic anti-depressants, etc.), sedative-hypnotics (e.g. benzodiazepines), and opioids. Other common causes include metabolic derangements (elevated sodium or calcium, low glucose or oxygen); infections; CNS pathology; or drug/alcohol withdrawal. The degree of work-up to seek the cause of delirium is determined by understanding the disease trajectory and overall goals of care ( see Fast Fact #65 ). The drug of choice for most patients is a major tranquilizer. There is one controlled clinical trial of haloperidol versus lorazepam in HIV patients; haloperidol was the superior agent. Haloperidol is administered in a dose escalation process similar to treating pain. Start haloperidol 0.5-2 mg PO or IV q1hour PRN. Benzodiazepines can be used, but may cause paradoxical worsening of symptoms. Non-pharmacological treatments should always be used in delirium management: reduce or increase the sensory stimulation in the environment as needed; ask relatives/friends to stay by the patient; frequent reminders of time/place. See Fast Fact #60 for a discussion of newer pharmacological treatments References Yennaurjalingam S et al. Pain and terminal delirium research in the elderly. Clin Geriatr Med. 2005;21(1):93-119. Lawlor PG, et al. Occurrence, causes and outcome of delirium in patients with advanced cancer. Arch Int Med. 2000;160:786-794. Brietbart W, Marotta R, Platt M, et al. A double blind trial of Haloperidol, Chlorpromazine and Lorazepam in the treatment of delirium. Am J Psych. 1996; 153:231-237. Breitbart W, Alici Y. Agitation and delirium at the end of life. “We couldn’t manage him.” JAMA 2008; 300(24):2898-2910. ACGME Competencies: Medical Knowledge, Patient Care Keyword(s): Non-pain symptoms & syndromes 
#002 Converting to/from Transdermal Fentanyl, 2nd ed Author(s): David E Weissman MD Quick— what dose of the transdermal fentanyl patch (Duragesic TM ) is equianalgesic to a 3 mg/hr morphine continuous infusion? Conversions to and from fentanyl transdermal are notoriously tricky, requiring knowledge of the published conversion data, general opioid pharmacology, and a generous dose of common sense. See also Fast Fact #36 on opioid dose conversions. Step 1: Calculate the 24 hr morphine dose: 3 mg/hr x 24 hrs = 72 mg IV morphine/24 hrs. Step 2: Convert the IV dose to the equianalgesic oral morphine dose using a ratio of: 1 mg IV = 3 mg oral. Thus, 72 mg IV = 216 mg po/24 hours. Step 3: Convert the oral morphine dose to transdermal fentanyl. There are two methods: Method 1 – Standard Table. Look up fentanyl transdermal in the PDR and find the morphine conversion table. It says that 135-224 mg of morphine per 24 hours = 50 mcg/hr patch. Note: this range of morphine is very broad which may result in significant under dosing. Method 2 - Alternate Formula. In 2000, Brietbart, et al published an alternative method, based on the results of a multi-center trial by Donner, et al, that relied on a fixed dose conversion ratio to calculate the fentanyl transdermal dose. Brietbart recommended the ratio of: o 2 mg oral morphine/24 hr = 1 mcg/hr of transdermal fentanyl—rounded to the nearest patch size. In the case example above, 216 mg of oral morphine per day is approximately equianalgesic to the 100 mcg/hr fentanyl patch. Note: using this formula, 25 mcg/hr of transdermal fentanyl is roughly equivalent to 50 mg oral morphine/24 hours. This dose may be excessive when used in an opioid naïve patient, particularly the elderly. Key Considerations All equianalgesic ratios/formulas are approximations; clinical judgment is needed when making dose or drug conversions. The risk of sedation/respiratory depression with transdermal fentanyl is probably increased in the elderly or patients with liver and renal impairment due to its long half-life, thus, choose the lower end of the dosing spectrum. When in doubt, go low and slow, using prn breakthrough doses generously while finding the optimal dosage of a long-acting drug. Other teaching points about Duragesic: Start at the lowest dose, 12 mcg/hr, in an opioid naïve patient; there is no maximum dose. Therapeutic blood levels are not reached for 13-24 hours after patch application and drug will be continue to be released into the blood for at least 24 hours after patch removal. Opioid withdrawal symptoms can occur during dose conversions—care must be taken to avoid this by use of breakthrough opioids. Some patients will need to have their patches changed every 48 hours. The recommended upward dose titration interval is no more frequently than every 72 hours. Place patches on non-irradiated, hairless skin. Direct heat applied over the patch can increase drug absorption with increased toxic effects. There are no data that cachectic patients have reduced efficacy due to loss of subcutaneous fat References Physicians Desk Reference. Available at http://pdr.net. Donner B, et al. Direct conversion from oral morphine to transdermal fentanyl. Pain. 1996; 64:527-534. Payne R, et al. QOL and cancer pain: satisfaction and side effects with Transdermal fentanyl versus oral morphine. J Clinical Oncology. 1998:16:1588-1593. Breitbart W. An alternative algorithm for dosing transdermal fentanyl for cancer-related pain. Oncology. 2000; 14:695-702. Gourlay GK. Treatment of cancer pain with transdermal fentanyl. The Lancet Oncology. 2001; 2:165-172. ACGME Competencies: Medical Knowledge Keyword(s): Pain, Opioids 
#003 Syndrome of Imminent Death, 2nd ed Author(s): David E Weissman MD Background Virtually all dying patients go through a stereotypical pattern of symptoms and signs in the days prior to death. This trajectory is often referred to as “actively dying” or “imminent death”. Prompt recognition of this trajectory is key for clinicians to provide the most appropriate interventions for both the patient and family. 1. Stages Early Bed bound Loss of interest and/or ability tdrink/eat Cognitive changes: increasing time spend sleeping and/or delirium ( see Fast Fact #1 ) Middle Further decline in mental status tobtundation (slow tarouse with stimulation; only brief periods of wakefulness) Death rattle – pooled oral sections that are not cleared due tloss of swallowing reflex Late Coma Fever – usually from aspiration pneumonia Altered respiratory pattern – periods of apnea, hyperpnea, or irregular breathing Mottled extremities 2. Time Course The time to traverse the various stages can be less than 24 hours or as long as ~14 days. Patients who enter the trajectory who are nutritionally intact, with no infection (e.g. acute stroke), are apt to live longer than cachectic cancer patients 3. Common Family Concerns Family members present during the dying process often express the following concerns/questions. Clinicians can best help families by expecting these questions, providing education and reassurance ( see also Fast Fact #149 ). Is my loved one in pain; how would we know? Aren’t we just starving my loved one to death? What should we expect; how will we know that time is short? Should I/we stay by the bedside? Can my loved one hear what we are saying? What do we do after death? 4. Treatment Confirm treatment goals; recommend stopping treatments that are not contributing to comfort – pulse oximetry, IV hydration, antibiotics, finger sticks, etc. Communicate clearly to others what is going on. Write in progress notes: 'patient is dying,' not 'prognosis is poor'. Treat symptoms/signs as they arise: common among these are: oral secretions (see Fast Fact #109 ); delirium (# 1 , 60 ); dyspnea (# 27 ) and pain (# 53 , 54 ). Provide excellent mouth and skin care. Provide daily counseling and support to families. References Rousseau P. Management of symptoms in the actively dying patient. In: Principles and Practice of Palliative Care and Supportive Oncology. Berger AM, Portenoy RK, and Weissman DE, eds. 2nd Edition. Philadelphia, PA: Lippincott, Williams, & Wilkins; 2002. Breitbart W, Alici Y. Agitation and delirium at the end of life. “We couldn’t manage him.” JAMA. 2008; 300(24):2898-2910. ACGME Competencies: Medical Knowledge, Patient Care Keyword(s): Non-pain symptoms & syndromes 
#004 Death Pronouncement in the Hospital, 2nd ed Author(s): David E Weissman MD and Charlotte A Heidenreich MD Background Physicians traditionally have little formal training in examining patients to determine death, notifying families, and in recording proper documentation. This Fast Fact reviews key steps in the death pronouncement and notification process. See also Fast Facts#76 , 77 on telephone notification of death. The Phone Call: “Please come and pronounce this patient” Find out the circumstances of the death – expected or sudden? Is the family present? Preparation Before You Enter the Room Get the details on the circumstances of death from the nurse. For residents, find out if the attending physician has been called. In general, see the patient before calling the attending, unless there are unusual family dynamics or details surrounding the death that you should discuss with the attending. Determine if the family has requested or if you believe there is value in requesting an autopsy. Some institutions have specific policies about autopsy requests. Determine if the patient\family has already been contacted by the Organ Donor Network (see Fast Fact #79 Discussing Organ Donation). Review the chart for important medical (length of admission, cause of death) and family issues (Who is family? Faith? Is there a clergy contact?). In the Room You may want to ask the nurse or chaplain to accompany you; he/she can give you support and introduce you to the family. Introduce yourself (including your relationship to the patient) to the family. Ask each person their name and relationship to the patient. Empathetic statements are appropriate: “I’m sorry for your loss...” Or – “This must be very difficult for you....” Explain what you are there to do. Tell the family they are welcome to stay while you examine their loved one. Ask if family members have any questions or if they wish to speak with a chaplain. The Pronouncement Identify the patient by the hospital ID tag. Note the general appearance of the body. Ascertain that the patient does not rouse to verbal or tactile stimuli. Avoid overtly painful stimuli especially if family members are present. Nipple or testicle twisting, or deep sternal pressure are inappropriate. Listen for the absence of heart sounds; feel for the absence of carotid pulse. Look and listen for the absence of spontaneous respirations. Record the position of the pupils and the absence of pupillary light reflex. Record the time at which your assessment was completed. Documentation in the Medical Record Called to pronounce (name); Chart the findings of physical examination. Note date and time of death; Note if family and attending physician were notified. Document if family declines or accepts autopsy; document if the coroner was notified. References: Marshall SA, Ruedy J. On Call: Principles and protocols. 4th Ed. Philadelphia, PA: Saunders; 2004. Marchand LR, Kushner KP. Death Pronouncement: survival tips for residents. American Family Physician. July 1998. Available at : http://www.aafp.org/afp/980700ap/rsvoice.html. Magrane BP, Gilliland MGF, King D. Certification of Death by Family Physicians. American Family Physician. 1997; 56:1433-8. ACGME Competencies: Interpersonal and Communication Skills, Patient Care Keyword(s): Ethics, law, policy, health systems 
#005 The Causes of Nausea and Vomiting (V.O.M.I.T.), 2nd ed Author(s): James Hallenbeck MD Background By understanding the pathophysiology of nausea and targeting antiemetics to specific receptors, therapy can be optimized and side effects minimized. An easy way to remember the causes of vomiting is the VOMIT acronym. In the table below receptors involved in different types of nausea are highlighted using this acronym. Blockade of these receptors allows rational, focused therapy. Cause - V estibular Receptors Involved - Cholinergic, Histaminic Drug Class Useful - Anticholinergic, Antihistaminic Drug Examples - Scopolamine patch, Promethazine Cause - O bstruction of Bowel by Constipation Receptors Involved - Cholinergic, Histaminic, likely 5HT3 Drug Class Useful - Stimulate myenteric plexus Drug Examples - Senna products Cause - Dys M otility of upper gut Receptors Involved - Cholinergic, Histaminic, 5HT3, 5HT4 Drug Class Useful - Prokinetics which stimulate 5HT4 receptors Drug Examples - Metoclopramide Cause - I nfection, I nflammation Receptors Involved - Cholinergic, Histaminic, 5HT3, Neurokinin 1 Drug Class Useful - Anticholinergic, Antihistaminic, 5HT3 antagonists, Neurokinin 1 antagonists Drug Examples – Promethazine (e.g. for labyrinthitis), Prochlorperazine Cause - T oxins stimulating the chemoreceptor trigger-zone in the brain such as opioids Receptors Involved - Dopamine 2, 5HT3 Drug Class Useful - Antidopaminergic, 5HT3 Antagonists Drug Examples - Prochlorperazine, Haloperidol, Ondansetron Notes 5HT3, 5HT4 refer to the serotonin receptors, subtypes 3 & 4. Promethazine and prochlorperazine are very different drugs. Promethazine is most useful for vertigo and gastroenteritis due to infections and inflammation. Prochlorperazine is preferred for opioid related nausea. There is no evidence supporting the use of lorazepam as a sole agent for nausea. Sedated patients are more prone to aspiration. ‘O’ here relates to ‘obstruction’ of bowels by constipation, not mechanical blockage (see Fast Facts#45 , 119 for management of mechanical obstructions). References Glare P, et al. Systemic review of the efficacy of antiemetics in the treatment of nausea in patients with far-advanced cancer. Support Care Cancer. 2004; 12:432-440. Hallenbeck J. Palliative Care Perspectives. New York, NY: Oxford University Press; 2003: pp75-86. ACGME Competencies: Medical Knowledge, Patient Care Keyword(s): Non-pain symptoms & syndromes 
#006 Delivering Bad News-Part 1, 2nd ed Author(s): Bruce Ambuel PhD and David E Weissman MD Case Scenario: You are caring for a previously healthy 52 year old man with a new problem of abdominal pain. After conservative treatments fail, a diagnostic abdominal CT scan is done showing a focal mass with ulceration in the body of the stomach and numerous (more than 10) densities in the liver compatible with liver metastases. The radiologist feels that the findings are absolutely typical of metastatic stomach cancer. How do you prepare to discuss these test results with the patient? Preparing to Delivery Bad News Create an appropriate physical setting: a quiet, comfortable room, turn off beeper, check personal appearance, have participants – including yourself – sitting down. Determine who should be present. Ask the patient who they want to participate and clarify their relationships to the patient. Decide if you want others present (e.g. nurse, consultant, chaplain, social worker) and obtain patient/family permission. Think through your goals for the meeting as well as possible goals of the patient. Make sure you know basic information about the patient’s disease: prognosis, treatment options, next steps. Special circumstances: If the patient lacks decision-making capacity (e.g. developmentally delayed, demented, delirious, etc.), make sure the legal decision-maker is present. Special circumstances: If the patient or family do not speak English, obtain a skilled medical interpreter. Use phone translation services if necessary. See also Fast Fact #154 . Precepting self-reflection Residents will invariably have strong emotions when they have to give bad news. This emotional response can be heightened by various factors—a young patient, an unexpected diagnosis, a patient with whom the physician has a long-standing relationship, etc. Preceptors need to support the resident. Key teaching points: Residents may not spontaneously discuss their own emotional reaction with a preceptor, therefore preceptors need to introduce this topic. “This is a really hard case, how are you doing?” Physicians often have strong emotional reactions when a patient encounters bad news. Normalize the experience for the resident. “It’s normal to have strong feelings”. Three methods for coping with these feelings are: Identify your feelings (anger, sadness, fear, guilt); Talk with a colleague; Keep a personal journal. Role play the discussion with the resident before you go into the room; ask them to reflect on how it “feels”…what is hard…what is easy. Encourage continued self-reflection. See related Fast Facts: Delivering Bad News Part 2 ( #11 ); Death Pronouncement ( #4 ); Moderating a Family Conference ( #16 ); Responding to Patient Emotion ( #29) ; Dealing with Anger ( #59 ). References Buckman R. How to break bad news: A guide for health care professionals. Baltimore, MD: Johns Hopkins University Press; 1992. Faulkner A. Breaking bad news – a flow diagram. Palliative Medicine. 1994: 8;145-151. Iverson, VK. Pocket protocols—Notifying Survivors About Sudden, Unexpected Deaths. Tuscon, AZ: Galen Press; 1999. Ptacek, JT, Eberhardt, TL. Breaking bad news: A review of the literature. JAMA. 1996; 276(6): 496-502. Quill TE. Bad news: delivery, dialogue and dilemmas. Arch Intern Med. 1991; 151:463-468. Girgis A, Sanson-Fischer RW. Breaking bad news: consensus guidelines for medical practitioners. J Clin Onc. 1995; 13:2449-2456. Von Gunten CF, Ferris FD and Emanuel LL. Ensuring competency in end-of-life care: Communication and Relational Skills. JAMA. 2000; 284:3051-3057. ACGME Competencies: Interpersonal and Communication Skills, Patient Care Keyword(s): Communication 
#007 Depression in Advanced Cancer, 2nd ed Author(s): Eric Warm MD and David E Weissman MD Background Diagnosing and providing treatment for a major depressive episode in patients with advanced cancer can improve quality of life. However, diagnosing major depression in an advanced cancer can be complicated by the fact that many cancer symptoms overlap with the somatic symptoms of depression. Clinicians often rely more on the psychological or cognitive symptoms of depression (worthlessness, hopelessness, excessive guilt, and suicidal ideation) than the physical/somatic signs (weight loss, sleep disturbance) when making a diagnosis in advanced cancer patients. Endicott has proposed substituting somatic criteria with affective criteria when evaluating depression in advanced cancer patients: Physical/somatic symptoms… Change in appetite/weight Sleep disturbance Fatigue, loss of energy Diminished ability to think or concentrate …are replaced by psychological symptoms Tearfulness, depressed appearance Social withdrawal, decreased talkativeness Brooding, self-pity, pessimism Lack of reactivity, blunting Teaching Point: The key indicators of depression in the terminally ill are persistent feelings of hopelessness and worthless and/or suicidal ideation. Symptoms of depression can overlap with those of anticipatory grief, a normal aspect of the dying process. See Fast Fact#43 for a complete description of anticipatory grief and how to differentiate from major depression. See Fast Fact #146 on screening for depression in palliative care. References Endicott J. Measurement of depression patients with cancer. Cancer. 1983; 53:2243-8. Block SD. Assessing and managing depression in the terminally ill. Ann Inter Med. 2000; 132:209-217. ACGME Competencies: Medical Knowledge, Patient Care Keyword(s): Psychosocial and Spiritual Experience 
#008 Morphine and Hastened Death, 2nd ed Author(s): Charles F von Gunten MD Question: What is the distinction between the use of morphine at the end of life to control symptoms and euthanasia/assisted suicide? Case Scenario: An 83 year old former industrial worker has been hospitalized because of severe pain. He has pancreatic cancer with metastases to liver and lung. He has severe abdominal pain, and opioid therapy with morphine is recommended for pain relief. Main Teaching Points Many physicians inaccurately believe that morphine has an unusually or unacceptably high risk of an adverse event that may cause death, particularly when the patient is frail or close to the end of his or her life. In fact, morphine-related toxicity will be evident in sequential development of drowsiness, confusion, then loss of consciousness before respiratory drive is significantly compromised. Many physicians inappropriately call this risk of a potentially adverse event, a double effect, when it is in fact a secondary, unintended consequence. The principle of double effect refers to the ethical construct where a physician uses a treatment, or gives medication, for an ethical intended effect where the potential outcome is good (eg, relief of a symptom), knowing that there will certainly be an undesired secondary effect (such as death). An example might be the separation of conjoined twins knowing that one twin will die so that the other will live. Although this principle of “double effect” is commonly cited with morphine, in fact, it does not apply, as the secondary adverse consequences are unlikely. When offering a therapy, it is the intent in offering a treatment that dictates whether it is ethical medical practice: if the intent in offering a treatment is desirable or helpful to the patient and the potential outcome good (such as relief of pain), but a potentially adverse secondary effect is undesired and the potential outcome bad (such as death), then the treatment is considered ethical If the intent is not desirable or will harm the patient and the potential outcome bad, the treatment is considered unethical All medical treatments have both intended effects and the risk of unintended, potentially adverse, secondary consequences, including death. Some examples are total parenteral nutrition, chemotherapy, surgery, amiodarone, etc. Assisted suicide and euthanasia are not examples of “double effect.” The intention in offering the treatment in assisted suicide and euthanasia is to end the patient’s life. If the intent for using morphine in the scenario is to relieve pain and not to cause death, and accepted dosing guidelines are followed: The treatment is considered ethical The risk of a potentially dangerous adverse secondary effects particularly hastening death is minimal and The risk of respiratory depression is vastly over-estimated. References Emanuel LL, von Gunten CF, Ferris FD. The Education for Physicians on End-of-Life Care (EPEC) curriculum. Chicago, IL: American Medical Association, Chicago; 1999. http://www.epec.net . Morita T, et al. Effects of high dose opioids and sedatives on survival in terminally ill cancer patients. J Pain Sympt Manage. 2001; 21:282-9. Regnard D. Double effect is a myth leading a double life [letter]. BMJ. 2007; 334:440. ACGME Competencies: Medical Knowledge, Patient Care Keyword(s): Ethics, Law, Policy Health Systems, Pain – Opioids 
#009 Hospice & Palliative Medicine Recertification Exam, 2nd ed Author(s): David E Weissman MD Editor’s Note (March 2009): This Fast Fact was originally about the American Board of Hospice and Palliative Medicine board certification examination, which is no longer offered. Physicians interested in board certification in Hospice and Palliative Medicine should consult their primary boards for more information (e.g. American Board of Internal Medicine, American Board of Family Medicine, etc.). 
#010 Tube Feed or Not Tube Feed?, 2nd ed Author(s): James Hallenbeck MD Background Tube feeding is frequently used in chronically ill and dying patients. The evidence for much of this use is weak at best. The Fast Fact reviews data on the use of tube feeding in advanced illness. For prevention of aspiration pneumonia Numerous observational studies have demonstrated a high incidence of aspiration pneumonia in those who have been tube fed. Reduction in the chance of pneumonia has been suggested for non-bed-ridden post-stroke patients in one prospective, non-randomized study. For bedridden post-stroke patients, no reduction was observed. Three retrospective cohort studies comparing patients with and without tube feeding demonstrated no advantage to tube feeding for this purpose. Swallowing studies, such as videofluoroscopy, lack both sensitivity and specificity in predicting who will develop aspiration pneumonia. Croghan’s (1994) study of 22 patients undergoing videofluoroscopy demonstrated a sensitivity of 65% and specificity of 67% in predicting who would develop aspiration pneumonia within one year. In this study no reduction in the incidence of pneumonia was demonstrated in those tube fed. Swallowing studies may be helpful in providing guidance regarding swallowing techniques and optimal food consistencies for populations amenable to instruction. See Fast Fact #128 for discussion of the role of swallowing studies. For life prolongation via caloric support Data is strongest for patients with reversible illness in a catabolic state (such as acute sepsis). Data is weakest in advanced cancer. No improvement in survival has been found (see exceptions noted below). Individual patients may have weight stabilization or gain with tube feeding. However, when cohorts of patients have been studied in non-randomized retrospective or prospective studies, no survival advantage between tube fed and hand fed cohorts has been demonstrated. Tube feeding may be life-prolonging in select circumstances: Patients with good functional status and proximal GI obstruction due to cancer Patients receiving chemotherapy/XRT involving the proximal GI tract. Selected HIV patients Patients with Amyotrophic Lateral Sclerosis For enhancing quality of life Where true hunger and thirst exist, quality of life may be enhanced (such as in very proximal GI obstruction). Most actively dying patients (see Fast Fact #3 ) do not experience hunger or thirst. Although dry mouth is a common problem, there is no relation to hydration status and the symptom of dry mouth – see Fast Fact #133 . A recent literature review using palliative care and enteral nutrition as search terms found no studies demonstrating improved quality of life through tube feeding (results were limited to a few observational studies). Tube feeding may adversely affect quality of life if patients are denied the pleasure of eating. Summary Although commonly used, current data does not provide much support for the use of artificial enteral nutrition in advanced dementia, or in patients on a dying trajectory from a chronic illness. A recommendation to use, or not use, tube feeding should be made only after first establishing the overall Goals of Care (see Fast Fact #16 ). Recommendations for how to discuss the issue tube feeding with patients/families can be found in Fast Fact #84. References Loeb MB, Becker M, Eady A, Walker-Dilks C. Interventions to prevent aspiration pneumonia in older adults: a systematic review. J Am Geriatr Soc. 2003;51(7):1018-1022. Meier DE, Ahronheim JC, Morris J, Baskin-Lyons S, Morrison RS. High Short-term Mortality in Hospitalized Patients With Advanced Dementia: Lack of Benefit of Tube Feeding. Arch Intern Med. 2001; 161(4):594-599. Nakajoh, K., T. Nakagawa, et al. Relation between incidence of pneumonia and protective reflexes in post- stroke patients with oral or tube feeding. J Intern Med . 2000; 247: 39-42. Finucane T, Christmas C, Travis K. Tube feeding in patients with advanced dementia. JAMA. 1999; 282:1365-1369. Finucane T, Bynum J. Use of tube feeding to prevent aspiration pneumonia. Lancet. 1996; 348:1421-1424. Croghan J, Burke E, Caplan S, Denman S. Pilot study of 12-month outcomes of nursing home patients with aspiration on videofluroscopy. Dysphagia. 1994; 9:141-146. ACGME Competencies: Medical Knowledge, Patient Care Keyword(s): Non-Pain Symptoms and Syndromes 
#011 Delivering Bad News-Part 2, 2nd ed Author(s): Bruce Ambuel PhD and David E Weissman MD Case Scenario: You are caring for a previously healthy 52 year old man with a one-month of abdominal pain and weight loss. On exam he had a 2 cm hard left supraclavicular lymph node. A CT scan showed a focal mass with ulceration in the body of the stomach and numerous densities in the liver compatible with liver metastases. The radiologist feels that the findings are consistent with metastatic stomach cancer. How do you discuss these test results with the patient? Steps in Delivering Bad News Determine what the patient & family knows; make no assumptions. Examples: What is your understanding of your present condition? What have the doctors told you? Before presenting bad news, consider providing a brief overview of the patient’s course so that every one has a common source of information. Speak slowly, deliberately and clearly. Provide information in small chunks. Check reception frequently. Give fair warning – I am afraid I have some bad news – then pause for a moment. Present bad news in a succinct and direct manner. Be prepared to repeat information and present additional information in response to patient and family needs. Sit quietly. Allow the news to sink in. Wait for the patient to respond. Listen carefully and acknowledge patient’s and family’s emotions, for example by reflecting both the meaning and emotion of their response. Normalize and validate emotional responses: feeling numb, angry, sad, and fearful. Give an early opportunity for questions, comments. Present information at the patient’s or family’s pace; do not overwhelm with detail. The discussion is like pealing an onion. Provide an initial overview. Assess understanding. Answer questions. Provide the next level of detail or repeat more general information depending upon the patient’s and family’s needs. Assess thoughts of self-harm Agree on a specific follow-up plan (I will return later today, write down any questions.). Make sure this plan meets the patient’s needs. Involve other team members in follow-up. Precepting Points Residents often feel strong emotions when they have to give bad news to a patient. This emotional response can be heightened by various factors—a young patient, an unexpected diagnosis, a patient with whom the physician has a long-standing relationship, etc. As a preceptor, you will want to support the resident. Key teaching points: Residents may not spontaneously discuss their own emotional reaction with a preceptor, therefore you will want to introduce this topic. Physicians often have strong emotional reactions when a patient encounters bad news. This is normal and OK. Three methods for coping with these feelings: Identify your feelings (anger, sadness, fear, guilt); Talk with a colleague; Keep a personal journal. See related Fast Facts: Delivering Bad News – Part 1 ( #6 ); Death Pronouncement ( #4 ); Moderating a Family Conference ( #16 ); Responding to Patient Emotion ( #29 ); Dealing with Anger ( #59 ). Resources Buckman R. How to break bad news: A guide for health care professionals. Baltimore, Johns Hopkins University Press: 1992. Faulkner A. Breaking bad news – a flow diagram. Palliative Medicine. 1994: 8;145-151. Iverson, VK. Pocket protocols—Notifying survivors about sudden, unexpected deaths. Tuscon, Arizona, Galen Press: 1999. Ptacek, JT, Eberhardt, TL. Breaking bad news: A review of the literature. JAMA. 1996; 276(6): 496-502. Quill TE. Bad news: delivery, dialogue and dilemmas. Arch Intern Med. 1991; 151:463-468. Girgis A, Sanson-Fischer RW. Breaking bad news: consensus guidelines for medical practitioners. J Clin Onc. 1995; 13:2449-2456. Von Gunten CF, Ferris FD and Emanuel LL. Ensuring competency in end-of-life care: Communication and Relational Skills. JAMA. 2000; 284:3051-3057. ACGME Competencies: Interpersonal and Communication Skills, Patient Care Keyword(s): Communication 
#012 Myths About Advance Directives, 2nd ed Author(s): Eric Warm MD Background Written advance directives are legal in every stat; laws and forms, however, vary state to state. See Fast Fact #178 for more about the POLST paradigm of advanced directive/treatment orders. There are two general types of advance directives: Health care power of attorney (‘durable power of attorney for health care,’ ‘health care agent,’ etc.) - a document in which the patient appoints someone to make decisions about his/her medical care if he/she cannot make those decisions. Living will - a written document in which a patient's wishes regarding the administration of medical treatment are described if the patient becomes unable to communicate at the end of life. Some documents are combinations of the two. The following are some common misunderstandings that create barriers to properly completing and implementing advance directives. 1. Many physicians believe it is not appropriate to begin advance directive planning on an outpatient basis. In reality multiple studies have shown that patients want their doctors to discuss advance care planning with them before they become ill. Many others have shown a positive response from patients when advance directive discussions are held during outpatient visits. Overcoming this barrier: When beginning a discussion of advance directives simply ask, “Do you know what an advance directive is? Do you have one?” If you are afraid the patient may respond negatively, perhaps saying to you “Is there something wrong with me? Am I sicker than you are letting on?”, respond by saying, “I ask all of my patients this question, sick or well.” Note, if your practice is in a hospital, the Patient Self Determination Act of 1991 mandates that every person be asked about advance directives when seen (inpatient and outpatient). 2. Many people believe that if a loved one has financial power of attorney he/she doesn’t need a separate medical power of attorney. This is not true. Most often these are separate legal documents. Overcoming this barrier: When discussing “Power of Attorney” with your patient, assess his/her understanding. Have literature in your office to clear up discrepancies. 3. Many physicians and patients feel that having an advance directive means 'don't treat.” Unfortunately advance directives can be a trigger for disengagement by medical staff. Overcoming this barrier: Make sure your patient and staff understand that advance directives don’t mean 'don't treat me'. They mean, 'treat me the way I want to be treated.” 4. Patients often fear that once a person names a proxy in an advance directive they lose control of their own care. Overcoming this barrier: When explaining advance directives to your patients make sure they understand that as long as they retain decision making capacity they retain control of their medical destiny. Advance directives only become active when a person cannot speak for him or herself. 5. Many people believe that only old people need advance directives. Overcoming this barrier: The stakes may actually be higher for younger people if tragedy strikes. Use the example of the Terry Schiavo case as a trigger to enlighten the discussion. Ask – “What would you want if you were in her situation?” References Aitkin PV. Incorporating advance care planning into family practice. American Family Physician. 1999; 59(3):605-14, 617-20. The SUPPPORT Principal Investigators. A controlled trial to improve care for seriously ill hospitalized patients. The study to understand prognoses and preferences for outcomes and risks of treatments (SUPPORT). JAMA. 1995; 274:1591-1598. American Bar Association. 10 Legal Myths About Advance Medical Directives. Available at: www.abanet.org/aging/myths.html . ACGME Competencies: Interpersonal and Communication Skills, Medical Knowledge, Patient Care Keyword(s): Communication 
#013 Determining Prognosis in Advanced Cancer, 2nd ed Author(s): David E Weissman MD Background How long do I have, Doc? is among the most common questions asked by cancer patients, especially when informed that there are no further effective anti-neoplastic treatment options. Although prognostication is not an exact science, there are data to help clinicians provide useful information to patients and families – information critical to making realistic end-of-life decisions and referrals for home hospice service (see Fast Fact #30 ). Performance Status The single most important predictive factor in cancer is Performance Status (‘functional ability,’ ‘functional status’): a measure of how much a patient can do for themselves, their activity and energy level. Patients with solid tumors typically lose ~ 70% of their functional ability in the last 3 months of life. The most common scales used to measure functional ability are the Karnofsky Index (100 = normal; 0 = dead) and the ECOG scale (Eastern Cooperative Oncology Group), (0 = normal; 5 = dead). A median survival of 3 months roughly correlates with a Karnofsky score <40 or ECOG > 3. Newer prognostic scales have been developed to help provide prognostic information (See Fast Facts#124 , 125 ). The simplest method to assess functional ability is to ask patients: How do you spend your time? How much time do you spend in a chair or lying down? If the response is >50% of the time, and is increasing, you can roughly estimate the prognosis at 3 months or less. Survival time tends to decrease further with increasing numbers of physical symptoms, especially dyspnea, if secondary to the cancer. Other Factors Several common cancer syndromes have well-documented short median survival times: Malignant hypercalcemia: 8 weeks, except newly diagnosed breast cancer or myeloma ( see Fast Fact #151 ) Malignant pericardial effusion: 8 weeks (see Fast Fact #209 ) Carcinomatous meningitis: 8-12 weeks (see Fast Fact #135 ) Multiple brain metastases: 1-2 months without radiation; 3-6 months with radiation. Malignant ascites (see Fast Fact #176 ), malignant pleural effusion, or malignant bowel obstruction: < 6 months. Other Comments In general, a patient with metastatic solid cancer, acute leukemia or high-grade lymphoma, who will not be receiving systemic chemotherapy (for whatever reason), has a prognosis of less than 6 months. Notable exceptions to this are patients with metastatic breast or prostate cancer with good performance status, as these cancers may have an indolent course. In these patients additional features suggesting short prognosis are needed (declining functional status, dyspnea, weight loss). Discussing Prognosis When discussing prognosis with patients/families, the following four step approach is recommended: Preparation; Content; Patient’s Response; Close. Remember to: Confirm that the patient/family are ready to hear prognostic information. Present information using a range: a few days to weeks; 2-4 months, etc. Allow silence after you provide information; respond to emotion (see Fast Fact #29 ). Use prognostic information as a starting point for eliciting end-of-life goals (see Fast Fact #65 ). References Lamont EB, Christakis NA.. Complexities in prognostication in advanced cancer. JAMA. 2003; 290:98-104. den Daas, N. Estimating length of survival in end-stage cancer: a review of the literature. J Pain Symp Manage. 1995; 10:548-555. Lassauniere JM, Vinant P. Prognostic factors, survival and advanced cancer. J Pall Care. 1992; 8:52-54. Ralston SH, et al. Cancer associated hypercalcemia. Ann Int Med. 1990; 112:499:504. Reuben DB, Mor V. Clinical symptoms and length of survival in patients with terminal cancer. Arch Int Med. 1998;148:1586-1591. ACGME Competencies: Medical Knowledge, Patient Care Keyword(s): Prognosis 
#014 Palliative Chemotherapy, 2nd ed Author(s): David E Weissman MD Introduction One often hears the term palliative chemotherapy, but what exactly does it mean and how can a non-oncologist decide if it has potential value? Why is chemotherapy used? From the perspective of the patient with locally advanced or metastatic cancer, chemotherapy is used with one of two intents: Hope for cure or hope for life-prolongation. Oncologists use the term palliative chemotherapy as a euphemism for chemotherapy that is not expected to be curative. What about chemotherapy used solely for symptom control—is that a realistic goal? Oncologists will occasionally recommend chemotherapy for symptom control, as there are some clinical trial data that in selected cancers chemotherapy may improve quality of life and/or symptom control, without impacting survival. However, as a general rule, physical symptoms related to the cancer highly correlate with tumor burden; chemotherapy that does not effect tumor growth will generally not improve physical symptoms caused by the tumor. What information do you need from the consulting oncologist to help a patient decide on the value of chemotherapy in advanced cancer? 1. What is the Response Rate of the proposed chemotherapy? Response Rate = (# of complete responses +#of partial responses)/total#of treated patients; as studied in clinical trials. To qualify as a Response, the reduction in tumor must last for at least one month: Complete Response = complete eradication of measurable tumor Partial Response = > 50% reduction in measurable tumor Progressive Disease = > 25% growth in measurable tumor Stable Disease = anything between partial response and progressive disease Note: response rate data that are generally quoted to patients comes from clinical trials involving closely monitored patients with good performance statuses. The response rates for patients outside of clinical trials can be expected to be lower – See Fast Fact#99 . 2. What is the Median Duration of Response of the proposed chemotherapy regimen? This number is vital for patients to make an informed decision and roughly correlates to months of added life to be expected if the chemotherapy is effective. The MDR, also known as Time to Progression (TTP), can be explained to the patient as: if the chemotherapy is effective at shrinking or stabilizing your cancer (if you are a chemotherapy responder), you can expect it will work for X-X months. 3. What is the potential treatment burden? Including acute and delayed toxicities, direct and indirect costs (lost work for family members), need for clinic visits or inpatient stays, need for treatment monitoring (e.g. blood tests, x-rays). 4. How long must treatment be continued? Standard practice is to wait for two full cycles of treatment before assessing response. However, if a patient is progressing during the first cycle, they will almost always continue to progress through a second cycle. For responding patients, chemotherapy is generally continued until there is disease progression or intolerable toxicities. Reference Ellison N, Chevlin EM. Palliative Chemotherapy. In: Principles and Practice of Palliative Care and Supportive Oncology. 2nd Edition. Berger A, Portenoy R, Weissman DE, eds. New York, NY: Lippincott-Raven; 2002. ACGME Competencies: Medical Knowledge, Patient Care Keywords: Prognosis, Communication 
#015 Constipation, 2nd ed Author: James Hallenbeck MD Constipation – it's not fun to have or to treat. As with other symptoms, rational therapy should be based on a sound understanding of underlying physiology. Our goal in treating constipation is generally not to 'cure' something, but to help the patient return to the best possible balance that will allow a normal bowel movement to be passed. Four major components affect the production of a normal BM: solid waste, water, motility and lubrication. Solid Waste – Too much or too little is a problem. The intestine is most efficient pushing intermediate volumes. Patients on fiber-poor diets may improve if fiber is added. Note: In patients with minimal fluid intake or poor gut motility (e.g. the dying patient) additional fiber can worsen the situation, causing a 'soft impaction'. Water Content – Stool water content depends on how much water we drink, our general hydration status, how much water is absorbed from and secreted into the intestine and how fast stool moves through the bowel. Any of these variables can be manipulated. It is easiest to limit absorption (and increase secretion into the gut) by adding osmotically active particles that retain water (e.g. Magnesium salts, non-absorbable sugars such as sorbitol and lactulose, or polyethylene glycol [PEG]). Note: Magnesium and phosphorus salts are contraindicated in renal failure. Hyperosmolar solutions may worsen dehydration by drawing body water into the gut lumen. Sickly-sweet sorbitol and lactulose may be difficult to for patients to tolerate. PEG is flavorless and may be better tolerated. Motility – Patients with low-activity levels (bed-ridden, dying patients and patients with advanced neurodegenerative disorders) and use of certain drugs (see below) lead to motility problems. Senna preparations, which stimulate the myenteric plexus are generally favored. Use senna tablets (or granules, liquid, or tea), starting with 1 tab QHS, may be gradually increased to 4 tabs BID if needed. Before increasing motility, evacuate existing constipated stool with an enema or cramping can result. Lubrication simply eases passage and minimizes pain that can interfere with excretion. Most commonly used is dioctyl sodium sulfosuccinate (DSS, or docusate), which decreases stool surface tension much like soap. Usual dosage is 240 mg PO daily or BID. DSS also tastes like soap, so liquid DSS should never be given PO, but may be given to tube-fed patients. Note: DSS is commonly used in combination with senna in opioid-induced constipation, but is generally inadequate as a sole agent. Mineral oil can be used as an enema but should not be given PO, as pneumonitis can result if aspirated. Glycerin suppositories can provide lubrication and draw-in water due to osmotically active particles. Medications that can cause/exacerbate constipation: Opioids, anticholinergics (tricyclic antidepressants, scopolamine, oxybutinin, promethazine, diphenhydramine), lithium, verapamil, bismuth, iron, aluminum, aalcium salts. References Klaschik E, Nauck F, Ostgathe C. Constipation--modern laxative therapy. Support Care Cancer. 2003; 11(11):679-685. Mancini I, Bruera E. Constipation in advanced cancer patients. Support Care Cancer. 1998; 6(4):356-364. ACGME Competencies: Medical Knowledge, Patient Care Keyword(s): Non-Pain Symptoms and Syndromes 
#016 Moderating an End-of-Life Family Conference, 2nd ed Author(s): Bruce Ambuel PhD and David E Weissman MD Background At some point during the course of a terminal illness, a meeting between health care professionals and the patient/family is usually necessary to review the disease course and develop end-of-life goals of care. Learning the process steps of a Family Conference are an important skill for physicians, nurses and others who are in a position to help patients and families reach consensus on end-of-life planning. Family Conference Process Steps Why are you meeting? Clarify conference goals in your own mind. What do you hope to accomplish? Where: A room with comfort, privacy and circular seating. Who: Patient (if capable to participating); legal decision maker/health care power of attorney; family members; social support; key health care professionals. Introduction and Relationship Building Introduce self & others; review meeting goals; clarify if specific decisions need to be made. Establish ground rules: each person will have a chance to ask questions and express views; no interruptions; identify legal decision maker; and describe importance of supportive decision making. If you are new to the patient/family, spend time seeking to know the “person”—ask about hobbies, family, what is important in her or his life, etc. Determine what the patient/family already knows. Tell me your understanding of the current medical condition? Ask everyone in the room to speak. Also ask about the past 1-6 months—what has changed in terms of functional decline, weight loss, etc. Review medical status Review current status, prognosis and treatment options. Ask each family member in turn if they have any questions about current status, plan & prognosis. Defer discussion of decision making until the next step. Respond to emotional reactions (See Fast Facts#29 , 59 ). Family Discussion with a Decisional Patient Ask the patient What decision(s) are you considering? Ask each family member Do you have questions or concerns about the treatment plan? How can you support the patient? Family Discussion with a Non-Decisional Patient Ask each family member in turn What do you believe the patient would choose if the patient could speak for him or herself? Ask each family member What do you think should be done? Ask if the family would like you to leave room to let family discuss alone. If there is consensus, go to 10; if no consensus, go to 9. When there is no consensus: Re-state: What would the patient say if they could speak? Ask: Have you ever discussed with the patient what he or she would want in a situation like this? If you, as a clinician, have a firm opinion about the best plan of care, recommend it simply and explicitly, and explain why. Use time as ally: schedule a follow-up conference the next day. Try further discussion: What values is your decision based upon? How will the decision affect you and other family members? Identify other resources: Minister/priest; other physicians; ethics committee. Wrap-up: Summarize consensus, disagreements, decisions, & plan. Caution against unexpected outcomes. Identify family spokesperson for ongoing communication. Document in the chart – who was present, what decisions were made, follow-up plan. Don't turf discontinuation of treatment to nursing. Continuity – Maintain contact with family and medical team. Schedule follow-up meetings as needed. See related Fast Facts : Delivering Bad News (# 6 , 11 ); Responding to Patient Emotion ( #29 ); Dealing with Anger ( #59 ), Conflict Resolution (# 183 , 184 ). References Ambuel, B. Conducting a family conference. In: Weissman DE, Ambuel B, Hallenbeck J, eds. Improving End-of-Life Care: A resource guide for physician education. 3rd Ed. Milwaukee, WI: The Medical College of Wisconsin; 2001. Quill TE. Initiating end-of-life discussions with seriously ill patients. JAMA. 2000; 284: 2502-2507. Baile WF et al. Discussing disease progression and end-of-life decisions. Oncology. 1999; 13:1021-1028. Weissman DE. Decision making at a time of crisis near the end of life. JAMA. 2004; 292: 1738-1743. ACGME Competencies: Interpersonal and Communication Skills, Patient Care Keyword(s): Communication 
#017 Patient-Centered Interviewing, 2nd ed Author(s): Bruce Ambuel PhD Clinical Case You admit Mary, a new patient, to the hospital. Mary has end-stage, metastatic pancreatic cancer. She has not seen a physician since she was given a terminal diagnosis 6 months ago at another institution. She is nutritionally depleted and has an apparent gastrointestinal obstruction causing significant bloating and discomfort. While you are admitting her she informs you that she is curing herself by drinking fresh fruit and vegetable juices. She refuses to discuss advanced directives because she “Does not trust you.” Patient-centered Interviewing How might you begin to develop a working relationship with Mary? One strategy is to strive to understand both Mary’s disease and her illness. Disease refers to a biological, pathophysiological process. Illness refers to the patient’s experience. You can assess a patient’s illness experience by asking about 4 dimensions—Feelings, Ideas, Function and Expectations. The acronym FIFE can be a helpful reminder. F = FEELINGS related to the illness, especially fears What are you most concerned about? Do you have any specific fears or worries right now? I imagine you have had many different feelings as you have coped with this illness. Sometimes people have fears that they keep to themselves and don’t tell their doctor. I = IDEAS and explanations of the cause of a symptom or illness What do you think might be going on? What do you think this pain means? Do you have ideas about what might have caused this illness? F = FUNCTIONING , the illness’ impact on daily life How has your illness affected you day to day? What have you had to give up because of your illness? What goals do you have now in your life? How has your illness affected your goals? How does this illness affect important people in your life? E = EXPECTATIONS of the doctor & the illness What do you expect or hope I can do for you today? Do you have expectations about how doctors can help? What do you hope this treatment will do for you? What are your expectations about what might happen with this illness? References StewartM, Brown JB, et al. Patient Centered Medicine: Transforming the Clinical Method. Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage Publications; 1995. Rosenberg EE, et al. Lessons for clinicians from physician-patient communication literature. Arch Fam Med. 1997; 6:279-283 Platt FW, Gaspar DL. “Tell me about yourself”: The patient-centered interview. Ann Int Med. 2001; 134:1079-1085. ACGME Competencies: Interpersonal and Communication Skills, Patient Care Keyword(s): Communication, Psychosocial and Spiritual Experience: Patients, Families, and Clinicians 
#018 Short-Acting Oral Opioid Dosing Intervals, 2nd ed Author(s): David E Weissman MD Background Oral opioids are among the most commonly prescribed drugs in palliative care. Despite national analgesic guidelines, the use of excessive intervals for short-acting oral opioids continues to pose a significant barrier to good analgesic care. Understanding the pharmacological rational for dosing intervals is key to proper prescribing and patient counseling. Short-Acting Oral Opioids Short-acting products are administered as either single agents (oral morphine, hydromorphone, oxycodone and codeine) or as combination products containing acetaminophen, aspirin or ibuprofen. For all these products, the peak analgesic effect occurs in 60-90 minutes with an expected total duration of analgesia of 2-4 hours. Standard reference sources generally cite a 4 hour dosing interval for the single-agent opioids, but 4-6 or 6 hour intervals for combination products (PDR, Micromedex). However, the Agency for Health Care Policy and Research (AHCPR) Clinical Practice Guideline (1994) recommends dosing intervals for all short-acting opioids at an interval or every 3-4 hours, an interval more consistent with patient reports of pain relief and the half-life of oral opioids. Is there a danger to more frequent drug administration? There is no danger of dosing intervals as often as every 2 hours for single agent products (e.g. morphine), in patients with normal renal function, as the peak effect will be reached in 60-90 minutes and there is rapid renal excretion. For combination products, the concern is excessive acetaminophen. Thus, if patients need opioids on an every four hour basis, it is appropriate to change to single agents without acetaminophen and/or add a long-acting opioid product so as to keep the total daily acetaminophen dose at less than 4 grams. Note: Transmucosal fentanyl citrate and oral oxymorphone have different pharmacokinetics than the agents mentioned above and are dosed differently – see Fast Facts#103 and#181 . Summary Prescribe the products listed above at intervals no greater than every 4 hours. Closely monitor daily acetaminophen intake when combination products are used. Provide explicit patient/family counseling regarding safe and allowable dosing intervals. Review your institutional opioid policies – ask if there is a hospital policy or guidelines for oral opioid doing intervals; if not, such guidelines should be developed to help guide practice. See related analgesic Fast Facts :#20 Opioid dose escalation#51 Opioid combination products#70 PRN range orders#74 Good and bad analgesic orders#82 Why patients do not take their opioids#94 Writing discharge/outpatient opioid prescriptions References Acute Pain Management Guideline Panel. Acute pain management: Operative or Medical Procedures and Trauma Clinical Practice Guideline. AHCPR Publication No. 92-0032. Available at: http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/books/bv.fcgi?rid=hstat6.chapter.32241. Cleary JF. Pharmacologic management of cancer pain. J Palliat Med. 2007; 10:1369-1394. Physicians Desk Reference. Available at: http://pdr.net . Micromedex. Available at: http://www.micromedex.com . ACGME Competencies: Medical Knowledge, Patient Care Keyword(s): Pain – Opioids 
#019 Taking A Spiritual History, 2nd ed Author(s): Bruce Ambuel PhD Background Illness raises fundamental questions – F or what may I hope? Why do I suffer? Does my suffering have meaning? What happens after I die? When a physician stands with a patient as they face death, the physician inevitably plays a role in supporting the patient’s inquiry into these spiritual questions. In addition some patients have specific preferences or needs regarding medical care, death and dying that are based upon their religious beliefs. The physician often plays an important role in supporting a patient’s exploration of these issues. Taking a spiritual history is one way to support the patient in this exploration. Maugans (1997) presents a framework for taking a spiritual history; the interview below comes primarily from Maugans’ article with some modification based upon the other sources cited. Taking a Spiritual History S—spiritual belief syste m Do you have a formal religious affiliation? Can you describe this? Do you have a spiritual life that is important to you? What is your clearest sense of the meaning of your life at this time? P—personal spirituality Describe the beliefs and practices of your religion that you personally accept. Describe those beliefs and practices that you do not accept or follow. In what ways is your spirituality/religion meaningful for you? How is your spirituality/religion important to you in daily life? I—integration with a spiritual community Do you belong to any religious or spiritual groups or communities? How do you participate in this group/community? What is your role? What importance does this group have for you? In what ways is this group a source of support for you? What types of support and help does or could this group provide for you in dealing with health issues? R—ritualized practices and restrictions What specific practices do you carry out as part of your religious and spiritual life (e.g. prayer, meditation, services, etc.) What lifestyle activities or practices do your religion encourage, discourage or forbid? What meaning do these practices and restrictions have for you? To what extent have you followed these guidelines? I—implications for medical care Are there specific elements of medical care that your religion discourages or forbids? To what extent have you followed these guidelines? What aspects of your religion/spirituality would you like to keep in mind as I care for you? What knowledge or understanding would strengthen our relationship as physician and patient? Are there barriers to our relationship based upon religious or spiritual issues? Would you like to discuss religious or spiritual implications of health care? T—terminal events planning Are there particular aspects of medical care that you wish to forgo or have withheld because of your religion/spirituality? Are there religious or spiritual practices or rituals that you would like to have available in the hospital or at home? Are there religious or spiritual practices that you wish to plan for at the time of death, or following death? From what sources do you draw strength in order to cope with this illness? For what in your life do you still feel gratitude even though ill? When you are afraid or in pain, how do you find comfort? As we plan for your medical care near the end of life, in what ways will your religion and spirituality influence your decisions? References Maugans TA. The SPIRITual History. Arch Fam Med. 1997; 5:11-16. Ambuel B, Weissman DE. Discussing spiritual issues and maintaining hope. In: Weissman DE, Ambuel B, eds. Improving End-of-Life Care: A Resource Guide for Physician Education, 2nd Edition. Milwaukee, WI: Medical College of Wisconsin; 1999. Griffith JL, Griffith ME. Hope in suffering/pain in health: Talking with patients about spiritual issues. Presented at The 18th Forum for the Behavioral Sciences in Family Medicine, Chicago, Illinois, October 1997. ACGME Competencies: Interpersonal and Communication Skills Keyword(s): Communication, Psychosocial and Spiritual Experience: Patients, Families, and Clinicians 
#020 Opioid Dose Escalation, 2nd ed Author(s): David E Weissman MD Background A common question from trainees is how fast, and by how much, can opioids be safely dose escalated? I like to use the analogy of furosemide (Lasix) when discussing this topic. I have never seen a resident order an increase in Lasix from 10 mg to 11 mg, yet that is precisely what often happens with opioids, especially parenteral infusions. Like furosemide, dose escalation of opioids should be done on the basis of a percentage increase. In fact, this is reflexively done when opioid-non-opioid fixed combination products are prescribed; going from one to two tablets of codeine/acetaminophen represents a 100% dose increase. The problem arises when oral single agents (e.g. oral morphine) or parenteral infusions are prescribed. Increasing a morphine infusion from 1 to 2 mg/hr is a 100% does increase; while going from 5 to 6 mg/hr is only a 20% increase, and yet many orders are written, “increase drip by 1 mg/hr, titrate to comfort.” Some hospitals and nursing units even have this as a standing pre-printed order or nursing policy. Key Point: In general, patients do not notice a change in analgesia when dose increases are less than 25% above baseline. There is a paucity of clinical trial data on this subject. A common formula used by many practitioners is: For ongoing moderate to severe pain increase opioids doses by 50-100%, irrespective of starting dose. For ongoing mild to moderate pain increase by 25-50%, irrespective of starting dose . When dose escalating long-acting opioids or opioid infusions, do not increase the long-acting drug or infusion basal rate more than 100% at any one time, irrespective of how many bolus/breakthrough doses have been used. These guidelines apply to patients with normal renal and hepatic function. For elderly patients, or those with renal/liver disease, dose escalation percentages should be reduced. The recommended frequency of dose escalation depends on the half-life of the drug. Short-acting oral single-agent opioids (e.g. morphine, oxycodone, hydromorphone), can be safely dose escalated every 2 hours. Sustained release oral opioids can be escalated every 24 hours. For methadone, levorphanol, or transdermal fentanyl no more frequently than every 72 hours is recommended. See related analgesic Fast Facts :#18 Oral opioid dosing intervals#51 Opioid combination products#70 PRN range orders#74 Good and Bad analgesic orders References Hanks G, Cherny NI, Fallon M. Opioid analgesic therapy. In: Oxford textbook of Palliative Medicine. 3rd Ed. Doyle D, Hanks G, Cherny N, Claman K, eds. New York, NY: Oxford University Press; 2005. Weissman DE, Ambuel B, Hallenbeck J. Improving End-of-Life Care: A resource guide for physician education. 3rd Edition. Milwaukee, WI: Medical College of Wisconsin; 2001. Handbook of Cancer Pain Management. 5th Edition. Wisconsin Cancer Pain Initiative; 1996. ACGME Competencies: Medical Knowledge, Patient Care Keyword(s): Pain – Opioids 
#021 Hope and Truth Telling, 2nd ed Author(s): Eric Warm MD and David E Weissman MD ‘ The miserable have no other medicine; But only hope.’ Claudio, in Measure for Measure Act 3, Sc.1, by William Shakespeare (1564-1616). This Fast Fact discusses the difficult balance between maintaining hope and truth telling, especially as it applies to giving bad news. One of the most difficult things physicians do is give bad news. Medical students and residents are often afraid that by telling someone the truth about his/her diagnosis, they will be responsible for taking away hope. And yet, are physicians really that powerful? Isn't it possible that our fear of causing the loss of hope is just another way we can avoid the harsh reality of impending death? This conflict, between truth-telling and fear of destroying hope, is commonly noted by patients and families who feel that 'the doctor is not really telling me everything,” a feeling that is highly corrosive to the doctor-patient relationship. Brody (1981) writes, ‘Hope means different things to different people, and different things to the same person as he/she moves through stages of illness.’ The physician can play a valuable role in helping the individual patient define her or his hopes and fears. When close to death, hope often becomes refocused away from long-term goals and towards short-term or spiritual goals. Hope may mean a pain-free day, a sense of security, love and non-abandonment, or a wedding to attend in the near future. ‘When we talk to patients and find out what is really worrying them, we can almost always give them realistic assurances’ (Brody 1981).Factors that often increase hope in the terminally ill include feeling valued, meaningful relationships, reminiscence, humor, realistic goals, and pain and symptom relief. Factors that often decrease hope include feeling devalued, abandoned or isolated ('there is nothing more that can be done'), lack of direction and goals, and unrelieved pain and discomfort. Some strategies for beginning a dialogue about hope and goals include: Ask the patient, 'Do you have long term hopes and dreams that have been threatened by this illness?' Support the patient in recognizing and grieving the possible loss of these hopes. Ask the person if there are particular upcoming events they wish to participate in – a wedding, birth, trip, etc. Ask 'What are your hopes for the future?' and 'Do you have specific concerns or fears?' Encourage the patient to make short, medium, and long range goals with an understanding that the course of terminal illness is always unpredictable. Teaching Tips Use the Brody article as a starting point for discussion with trainees When faced with the need to give bad news, ask trainees how they feel before they give the news; are they worried about causing a loss of hope? Ask them to reflect further – do they feel hopeless because of the situation? Whose feelings are they trying to protect, their own or the patient’s? Ask trainees to make a list of risks and benefits of truth telling. Use the list as a starting point for group discussion of the hope-truth telling conflict. References Brody H. Hope. JAMA. 1981; 246:1411-1412. Ambuel, B. Spirituality. In: Weissman D, Ambuel B, Hallenbeck J, eds. Improving End of Life Care: A Resource Guide for Physician Education. 3rd Edition. Milwaukee, WI: Medical College of Wisconsin; 2001. Twycross R, Lichter I. The terminal phase. In: Doyle D, et al, eds. Oxford Textbook of Palliative Medicine. 2nd Edition. New York, NY: Oxford University Press; 1998: pp. 977-78. Remen RN. Kitchen Table Wisdom: Stories That Heal. New York, NY: Riverhead Books; 1997. ACGME Competencies: Interpersonal and Communication Skills, Medical Knowledge, Patient Care Keyword(s): Communication, Psychosocial and Spiritual Experience: Patients, Families, and Clinicians 
#022 Writing a Condolence Letter, 2nd ed Author(s): Ron Wolfson PhD and Elizabeth Menkin MD Introduction One of the most meaningful acts of kindness you can do for a mourner is to write a letter of condolence. The words of sympathy and memory are comforting to the bereaved. More importantly, mourners are very appreciative that you took the time to sit and com¬pose a personal message to them or share a memory of the deceased. For professionals who work with dying patients, writing a condolence letter is an opportunity to reflect on both the pain and the rewards of our work. When we can appreciate the privilege it is to bear witness to the courage, kindness, caring and dignity that our patients and their families exhibit under duress, it gives us strength to continue this work. A good condolence letter has two goals: to offer tribute to the deceased and to be a source of comfort to the survivors. The best letters are like conversations, as if you were talking during a visit. Most often, they are written to the bereaved person to whom you feel closest, although it could be a general letter to the family. It should be written and sent promptly, generally within two weeks after the death. Use any standard stationery and write it by hand. Here are some specific guidelines for writing a good condolence letter: Acknowledge the loss and name the deceased. This sets the purpose and tone of the letter. Let the bereaved know how you learned of the death and how you felt upon hearing the news. Using the name of the deceased is a tribute that comforts most mourners. Express your sympathy. Use words of sym¬pathy that remind the bereaved that they are not alone in their feelings of sadness and loss. Note special qualities of the deceased. Acknowledge those characteristics that you cherished most about the person who has died. These might be qualities of personality (courage, sensitivity), or attributes (funny, affable), or ways the person related to the world (religious, devoted to community welfare). Recall a memory about the deceased. Talk about how the deceased touched your life. Try to capture what it was about the person in the story that you admired, appreciated or respected. You may use humor – the funny stories are often the most appreciated by the bereaved. Remind the bereaved of their personal strengths. Bereavement often brings with it self-doubt and anxiety about one's own personal worth. By reminding the bereaved of the qualities they possess that will help them through this period, you reinforce their ability to cope. Qualities to mention might be patience, optimism, religious belief, resilience, and competence. If you can recall something the deceased used to say about the mourner in this regard, you will really be giving the bereaved a gift. An example: “I was (impressed, inspired, awed, strengthened) by the devotion you and your family evidenced during the period of Mort's illness. Your presence (concern, care, attentiveness) was only one indication of your love for him.” Offer help, but be specific. “If there is anything I can do, please call” actually puts a burden on those in grief who may be totally at a loss about what needs to be done. A definite offer of help is more appreciated. Whatever you offer, do it – don't make an offer you cannot fulfill. End with a word or phrase of sympathy. Somehow, “sincerely,” “love,” or “fondly,” don't quite make it. Try one of these: “You are in my thoughts and prayers.” Or, “My fond respects to you and yours.” If you don't have enough to say for a formal condolence letter, you may prefer to send a sympa¬thy note. These are shorter communications that can be written on personal stationery or added to a commercially available card. As with a condolence letter, the major goal is to offer a tribute to the deceased and to offer comfort to the bereaved. Reference Wolfson, R. A Time to Mourn, A Time to Comfort. Woodstock, VT: Jewish Lights Publishing; 1993: pp 223-226. ACGME Competencies: Interpersonal and Communication Skills, Patient Care Keyword(s): Communication 
#023 Discussing DNR Orders-Part 1, 2nd ed Author(s): Charles F von Gunten MD, PhD and David E Weissman MD Background ‘Code status’ discussions with seriously ill patients should always take place in the context of the larger goals of care, using a step-wise approach. This Fast Fact introduces an approach to having these discussions; Fast Fact #24 discusses disagreements about ‘code status.’ Prior to any discussion of a do-not-resuscitate (DNR) order, physicians must know the data defining outcomes and morbidity of cardiopulmonary resuscitation in different patient populations (see Fast Fact #179 ). 1. Establish the setting. Ensure comfort and privacy; sit down next to the patient. Ask if family members or others should be present. Introduce the subject with a phrase such as: I’d like to talk with you about possible health care decisions in the future. 2. What does the patient understand? An informed decision about DNR status is only possible if the patient has a clear understanding of their illness and prognosis. Ask an open-ended question to elicit patient understanding about their current health situation. It is important to get the patient talking – if the doctor is doing all the talking, it is unlikely that the rest of the conversation will go well. Consider starting with phrases such as: What do you understand about your current health situation? What have the doctors told you about your condition? If the patient does not know/appreciate their current status this is time to review that information. 3. What does the patient expect? Ask the patient to consider the future. Examples of ways to start this discussion are What do you expect in the future? or What goals do you have for the time you have left—what is important to you? This step allows you to listen while the patient describes a real or imagined future. Many patients with advanced disease use this opening to voice their thoughts about dying—typically mentioning comfort, family, and home, as their goals of care. If there is a sharp discontinuity between what you expect and what the patient expects, this is the time to clarify. Listen carefully to the patient’s responses; most patients have thought a lot about dying, and only need permission to talk about what they have been thinking. Setting up the conversation in this way permits the physician to respond with clarifying and confirming comments such as: So what you’re saying is – you want to be as comfortable as possible when the time comes? Or – What you’ve said is – you want us to do everything we can to fight, but when the time comes, you want to die peacefully? Whenever possible, ask patients to explain the values that underlie their decisions: Can you explain why you feel that way? 4. Discuss a DNR order. Use language that the patient will understand; give information in small pieces. Don’t introduce CPR in mechanistic terms (e.g. “starting the heart” or “putting on a breathing machine”). Never say Do you want us to do everything? “Everything” is euphemistic and easily misinterpreted. Using the word “die” helps to clarify that CPR is a treatment that tries to reverse death. To most lay-people, when the heart and/or lungs stop, the patient dies. If the patient and doctor mutually recognize that death is approaching and the goals of care are comfort, then CPR is not an appropriate medical intervention and a clear recommendation against CPR should be made. You can say: We have agreed that the goals of care are to keep you comfortable and get you home. With this in mind, I do not recommend the use of artificial or heroic means to keep you alive. If you agree with this, I will write an order in the chart that if you die, no attempt to resuscitate you will be made. If the clinical situation is more ambiguous in terms of prognosis and goals of care, and you have no clear recommendation, the issue of DNR can be raised by asking: If you should die in spite of all of our efforts, do you want us to use heroic measures to attempt to bring you back? Or, How do you want things to be when you die? If you are asked to explain “heroic measures”, then describe the purpose, risks and benefits of CPR in greater detail. The clinical pearl here is to start general and become specific later in the conversation. 5. Respond to emotions. Strong emotions are common when discussing death. Typically the emotional response is brief. The most profound initial response a physician can make may be silence, providing a reassuring touch, and offering facial tissues (see Fast Fact #29 ). 6. Establish a plan. Clarify the orders and plans that will accomplish the overall goals you have discussed, not just the DNR order. A DNR order does not address any aspect of care other than preventing the use of CPR. It is unwise and poor practice to use DNR status as a proxy for other life-sustaining therapies. Consider using words: We will continue maximal medical therapy to meet your goals. However, if you die, we won’t use CPR to bring you back. Or, It sounds like we should move to a plan that maximizes your comfort. Therefore, in addition to a DNR order, I’d like to talk further with you how we can best do that. References Quill TE and Brody H. Physician recommendations and patient autonomy: finding a balance between physician power and patient choice. Ann Int Med. 1996; 125:763-769. Buckman R. How to break bad news: a guide for health care professionals. Baltimore, MD: Johns Hopkins University Press; 1992. Junkerman C, Schiedermayer D. Practical Ethics for Students, Interns and Residents. 2nd Edition. Hagerstown, MD: University Publishing Group; 1998. ACGME Competencies: Medical Knowledge, Patient Care, Professionalism Keyword(s): Communication 
#024 Discussing DNR Orders-Part 2, 2nd ed Author(s): Charles F von Gunten MD, PhD and David E Weissman MD Introduction The basic steps in the DNR discussion for seriously ill hospitalized patients were described In Fast Fact#23 . If you have followed those steps, what do you do if the patient or family/surrogate continues to want CPR and you think it is not in the patient's best interest? The seemingly unreasonable request for CPR typically stems from one of several themes: 1. Inaccurate information about CPR. The general public has an inflated perception of CPR success. While most people believe that CPR works 60-85% of the time, in fact the actual survival to hospital discharge is more like 10-15% for all patients, and less than 5% for the elderly and those with serious illnesses. This is a time to review/clarify the indications, contraindications, potential outcomes and morbidity of CPR. Start the discussion by asking, “What do you know about CPR?” 2. Hopes, fears, and guilt . Be aware that guilt (I haven't lived nearby to care for my dying mother) and fear (I am afraid to make a decision that could lead to my wife's death) are common motivating emotions for a persistent CPR request. Some patients or families need to be given an explicit recommendation, or permission from the physician, to stop all efforts to prolong life, to be told that that death is coming and that they no longer have to continue 'fighting'. Whenever possible, try to identify the underlying emotions and offer empathic comments that open the door to further conversation. This decision seems very hard for you. I want to give you the best medical care possible; I know you still want CPR, can you tell me more about your decision? Agreeing to a DNR order for many patients feels equivalent to them 'choosing' to die. Acceptance of impending death occurs over a vastly different time course for different patients/families; for some, it never occurs. Some patients see CPR as a 'last chance' for continued life. Probe with open-ended questions: What do you expect to happen? What do you think would be done differently, after the resuscitation, that wasn't being done before? Many patients describe hope for a new treatment. Use the opportunity to respond by describing that you are doing everything in your power to prolong their life before a cardiopulmonary arrest – you wouldn't be 'saving something' to do after they had died. If patients are not ready for a DNR order, don't let it distract you from other important end-of-life care needs; emphasize the goals that you are trying to achieve; save a repeat discussion for a future time; good care, relationship building and time will help resolve most conflicts. 3. Distrust of the medical care system . Patients or families may give you a clue that there is a fundamental distrust of doctors or the medical system; this should be addressed openly. What you said makes me wonder if you may not have full trust in the doctors and nurses to do what is best for you? Can you tell me about your concerns? 4. Managing persistent requests for CPR. Decide if you believe that CPR represents a futile medical treatment—that is, CPR cannot be expected to either restore cardiopulmonary function or to achieve the expressed goals of the patient (see Fast Fact #136 ). Physicians are not legally or ethically obligated to participate in a futile medical treatment, and some facilities have a policy that a physician may enter a DNR order in the chart against patient wishes. Aside from writing a DNR order without patient or family agreement, other options at this time include: Transfer care to another physician chosen by the patient/family. Plan to perform CPR at the time of death – but don't end the discussion. Engage the patient about her or his wishes if she or he survive the resuscitation attempt. Tell the patient that you need guidance because it is very likely that if she or he survives CPR, they will be on life support in the ICU, and they may not be able to make decisions for themselves; ask them (or the family) to help you determine guidelines for deciding whether to continue life-support measures. If not already done, clarify if there is a legal surrogate decision-maker. References Cantor MD, et al. Do-Not-Resuscitate orders and medical futility. Arch Int Med. 2003; 163:2689-2694. Layson RT, OcConnell T. Must consent always be obtained for a Do-Not-Resuscitate order? Arch Int Med. 1996; 156:2617-2620.. Diem SJ, Lantos JD, Tulsky JA. Cardiopulmonary resuscitation on television. Miracles and misinformation. NEJM.1996; 334(24):1578-82. Council on Ethical and Judicial Affairs. Medical futility in end-of-life care: Report of the Council on Ethical and Judicial Affairs of the AMA. JAMA. 1999; 281:937-941. ACGME Competencies: Medical Knowledge, Patient Care, Professionalism Keyword(s): Communication 
#025 Opioids and Nausea, 2nd ed Author(s): David E Weissman MD Background Why do patients get nauseated and vomit after receiving an opioid? Commonly described as an “allergy”, opioid-induced nausea/vomiting is not an allergic reaction. In fact, rather than indicating a pathologic reaction, nausea indicates normal functioning of the brain! Opioid-induced nausea occurs through the following mechanisms: At the base of the 4th ventricle lies the chemoreceptor trigger zone (CTZ), a “sampling port”, to detect substances that do not belong in the blood. Adjacent to the CTZ lies the medullary vomiting center which controls the complex muscular sequence of vomiting. When the CTZ detects a noxious chemical in the blood, a signal is sent to the VC and the vomiting reflex is initiated. Of note, this is the same mechanism when patients vomit after receiving chemotherapy. Opioids can directly stimulate the vestibular apparatus—patients note a spinning sensation with their nausea. Opioids cause constipation which can lead to nausea via stimulation of afferent cholinergic pathways. Do all opioids produce the same degree of nausea? There is little research data on this topic. In clinical practice, morphine and codeine are often mentioned as the worst offenders. Why are some patients more sensitive to the emetic effects of opioids than others? Unknown What is the natural history of opioid-induced nausea? Most patients develop tolerance to the emetic effects, so that within 3-7 days, at a constant opioid dose, the emetic effect will abate. What are management approaches? Dose adjustment—if good pain relief is achieved but associated with nausea, it may be possible to lower the opioid dose, still retain good analgesia, but eliminate the nausea. Switching opioids—there is variability in emetic reaction to different opioids. Note: since tolerance to nausea develops, one never knows if a reduction in nausea is from the change of drug or tolerance. Anti-emetics— Whenever possible, choose a drug directed at the most likely cause of nausea (see Fast Fact#5 ). There are little published data to guide physicians in specific choice of anti-emetic for opioid-induced nausea. Start with low-cost dopamine antagonists (e.g. prochlorperazine) or anti-cholinergics (e.g. scopolamine); Anti-histamines may be helpful for patients who note a spinning sensation. 5HT3 antagonists (e.g. ondansetron) can be used for more refractory cases. Two multi-center randomized trials have examined control of emesis associated with opioids not used for anesthesia. In one, 16 mg of ondansetron was more effective than 8 mg or placebo. In the other trial, stopped early due to lack of patient accrual, 24 mg ondansetron was no better than placebo or metoclopramide. Non-pharmacological approaches: there is little evidence to support non-pharmacological treatments for nausea outside of chemotherapy associated nausea; suggested approaches include acupressure and behavioral treatments. References Hardman JG, Limbird LE, et al, eds. Goodman and Gillman’s The Pharmacological Basis of Therapeutics. 9th Ed. New York, NY: McGraw-Hill; 1996. Herndon CM, et al. Management of opioid-induced gastrointestinal effects in patients receiving palliative care. Pharmacotherapy. 2002; 22:240-250. Glare P, et al. Systemic review of the efficacy of antiemetics in the treatment of nausea in patients with far-advanced cancer. Support Care Cancer. 2004; 12:432-440. Hardy J, et al. A double-blind, randomised, parallel group, multinational, multicentre study comparing a single dose of ondansetron 24 mg p.o. with placebo and metoclopramide 10 mg t.d.s. p.o. in the treatment of opioid-induced nausea and emesis in cancer patients. Support Care Cancer. 2002; 10:231-236. Pan CX, et al. Complementary and aternative medicine in the management of pain, dyspnea nd nausea and vomiting near the end-of-life: a systematic review. J Pain Sym Manage. 2000; 20:374-387. ACGME Competencies: Medical Knowledge, Patient Care Keyword(s): Non-Pain Symptoms and Syndromes, Pain – Opioids 
#026 The Explanatory Model, 2nd ed Author(s): James Hallenbeck MD Most things that don’t make sense from the outside DO make sense if understood from the inside… Have you ever had this experience – you are talking with a patient about some care option and you just cannot come to an agreement? It seems so obvious to you what needs to be done; how come he/she can’t see it? It just doesn’t make sense…. Yet, perhaps it does. People, especially those from different cultural backgrounds, often have very different ways of understanding illness, its consequences, and how best to treat it – a different explanatory model. Anthropologist Arthur Kleinman suggested that by exploring the explanatory model of illness we can better understand our patients and families; in effect making sense out of nonsense. To understand others, ask What, Why, How, and Who questions: What do you call the problem, What do you think the illness does, What do you think the natural course of the illness is, What do you fear? Why do you think this illness or problem has occurred? How do you think the sickness should be treated, How do want us to help you? Who do you turn to for help, Who should be involved in decision making? Inquiring about a patient’s or family’s explanatory model works best in the context of a meaningful relationship. The inquiry is best initiated with a statement of respect such as, “ I know different people have very different ways of understanding illness…Please help me understand how you see things.” The explanatory model can also be useful in interpreting the culture of Western medicine to others who find our explanatory model peculiar. The Western medical model is mechanistic in nature; the body is a machine, prone to malfunctions, requiring tune-ups or occasional part replacement. The patient’s obligation is to present this ‘machine’ to the ‘mechanic’ (physician) who will make repairs. This explanatory model differs greatly from other models that view illness more as an imbalance of forces (e.g. Chinese – yin/yang; Hispanic – hot/cold) or as being influenced by unseen forces such as spirits, demons or curses. Gaining a better understanding of another’s explanatory model will not in and of itself resolve conflicts in end-of-life care. However, a foundation can be established for negotiating a course of care that is acceptable within both the Western medical model and the model of the patient and family. Negotiation and compromise are critical; trying to convince the other that your explanatory model is correct, and theirs is wrong, will not work and will only worsen your relationship. See also Fast Fact #216 about asking about culture. References Hallenbeck J, Goldstein MK, Mebane EW. Cultural considerations of death and dying in the United States. Clinics in Geriatrics. 1996; 12(2):393-406. Kleinman A. Culture, illness and cure: Clinical lesions from anthropologic and cross-cultural research. Annals Int Med. 1978; 88:251-258. Hallenbeck J. Cross-cultural issues. In: Berger A, Portenoy RK, Weissman DE, eds. Principles and Practice of Palliative Care and Supportive Oncology. 2nd ed. Philadelphia, PA: Lippincott Williams & Wilkins; 2002: pp661-672. ACGME Competencies: Interpersonal and Communication Skills Keyword(s): Communication, Psychosocial and Spiritual Experience: Patients, Families, and Clinicians 
#027 Dyspnea at End of Life, 2nd ed Author(s): David E Weissman MD Introduction Dyspnea is defined as a subjective sensation of difficulty breathing. This Fast Fact reviews key elements in the assessment and treatment of dyspnea near the end-of-life. Etiology The causes of dyspnea include a wide spectrum of serious lung or heart conditions, anemia, anxiety, chest wall pathology, electrolyte disturbances or even urinary retention or constipation. Assessment Looking for simple problems is always warranted: is the Oxygen turned on? Is the tubing kinked? Is there fluid overload from IV fluids or TPN? Is dyspnea part of an acute anxiety episode, severe pain, constipation or urinary retention? Is there a new pneumothorax or worsening pleural effusion? Understanding 1) where patients are at in the dying trajectory, and 2) their identified goals of care, is essential to guide the extent of workup to discover reversible causes. If the patient is clearly dying (see Fast Fact #3), and the goals of care are comfort, then pulse oximetry, arterial blood gases, EKG, or imaging are not indicated. Treatment General measures Positioning (sitting up), increasing air movement via a fan or open window, and use of bedside relaxation techniques are all helpful. In the imminently dying patient, discontinuing parenteral fluids is appropriate. Treatment with opioids Opioids are the drugs of choice for dyspnea. In the opioid naïve patient, low doses of oral (10-15 mg) or parenteral morphine (2-5 mg), will provide relief for most patients; higher doses will be needed for patients on chronic opioids. When dyspnea is acute and severe, parenteral is the route of choice: 2-5 mg IV every 5-10 minutes until relief. In the inpatient setting, a continuous opioid infusion, with a PCA dose that patients, nurses or families can administer, will provide the timeliest relief (see Fast Facts#28 , 54 ). Nebulized morphine has been reported to provide benefit in uncontrolled case reports. Controlled trials have not demonstrated any benefit compared to placebo, confirming the low bioavailability of nebulized opioids Treatment with oxygen Oxygen is often, but not universally, helpful. When in doubt, a therapeutic trial, based on symptom relief, not pulse oximetry, is indicated. Patients generally prefer nasal cannula administration than a mask, especially in setting of imminent death when agitation from the mask is commonly seen. There is little reason to go beyond 4-6 L/min of oxygen via nasal cannula in the actively dying patient. Request a face-tent for patients who are claustrophobic from a mask. Treatment with other drugs Anti-tussives can help with cough (see Fast Fact #200 ), anit-cholinergics (e.g. scopolamine) will help reduce secretions, anxiolytics (e.g. lorazepam) can reduce the anxiety component of dyspnea. Other agents that may have specific disease modifying effects include diuretics, bronchodilators, and corticosteroids. Family/Team Discussions While there is no evidence that proper symptom management for terminal dyspnea hastens death, the course and management of terminal dyspnea, especially when opioids are used, should be fully discussed with family members, nurses and others participating in care to avoid confusion about symptom relief vs.fears of euthanasia or assisted suicide (see Fast Fact #8 ). References Bruera E, Sweeny C, and Ripamonti C. Dyspnea in patients with advanced cancer. In: Berger A, Portenoy R and Weissman DE, eds. Principles and Practice of Palliative Care and Supportive Oncology. 2nd Ed. New York, NY: Lippincott-Raven; 2002. Chan KS et al. Palliative Medicine in malignant respiratory diseases. In: Doyle D, Hanks G, Cherney N, and Calman N, eds. Oxford Textbook of Palliative Medicine. 3rd Ed. New York, NY: Oxford University Press; 2005. Viola R et al. The management of dyspnea in cancer patients: a systematic review. Supp Care Cancer. 2008; 16:329-337. Navigante AH, et al. Midazolam as adjunct therapy to morphine in the alleviation of severe dyspnea perception in patients with advanced cancer. J Pain Sympt Manage. 2006; 31:38-47. Fohr SA. The double effect of pain medication: separating myth from reality. J Pall Med. 1998; 1:315-328. ACGME Competencies: Medical Knowledge, Patient Care Keyword(s): Non-Pain Symptoms and Syndromes 
#028 Subcutaneous Opioid Infusions, 2nd ed Author(s): David E Weissman MD Background A parenteral opioid infusion is the standard of care for managing moderate-severe pain or dyspnea when the oral/rectal route is unavailable and/or frequent dose adjustments are needed. As death nears, the burden of maintaining intravenous (IV) access, especially in the home setting, can be enormous. An alternative delivery route is the subcutaneous (SQ) route for continuous infusions, Patient Controlled Analgesia (PCA), or intermittent bolus opioid injections. Drugs Morphine, hydromorphone (Dilaudid), fentanyl, and sufentanil can all be safely administered as SQ bolus doses or continuous SQ infusion. Methadone infusions cause frequent skin irritation; one case series reported successful use of methadone with concurrent dexamethasone infusion and frequent site rotation. Dosing equivalents Dose conversion ratios between the IV and SQ route for all the above listed opioids are not well established. For morphine, the ratio appears to be close to 1 mg IV = 1mg SQ. Pharmacokinetics SQ infusions can produce the same blood levels as chronic IV infusions. There is no data to suggest that cachectic, febrile or hypotensive patients have problems with drug absorption. Volume and Drug Choice The limiting feature of a SQ infusion is the infusion rate; in general, SQ tissue can absorb up to 3 ml/hr. At low opioid requirements morphine is generally the drug of choice based on availability and cost; a switch to hydromorphone is indicated for a high opioid requirement due its higher intrinsic potency (~6:1), thus the need for a smaller infusion volume. Administration Use a 25 or 27 gauge butterfly needle—place on the upper arm, shoulder, abdomen or thigh. Avoid the chest wall to prevent iatrogenic pneumothorax during needle insertion. The needle can be left indefinitely without site change unless a local reaction develops—typically, patients can keep the same needle in place for up to one week at a time. Toxicity Local skin irritation, itching, site bleeding or infection can occur. Of these, skin irritation is the most common, managed by a needle site change. Patient acceptance Patients readily appreciate the ease of SQ administration as an alternative to IV access. References Bruera E, Brenneis C, Michaud M, et al. Use of the subcutaneous route for the administration of narcotics in patients with cancer pain. Cancer. 1988; 62:407-411. Storey P. Subcutaneous infusion for control of cancer symptoms. J Pain Symptom Manage. 1990; 5:33-41. Waldman CS, Eason JR, Rambohul E, et al. Serum morphine levels—a comparison between continuous SQ and IV infusion in post-operative analgesia. Anaesthesia. 1984; 39:768-771. Mathew P, Storey P. Subcutaneous methadone in terminally ill patients: manageable local toxicity. J Pain Symptom Manage. 1999; 18:49-52. ACGME Competencies: Medical Knowledge, Patient Care Keyword(s): Pain – Opioids 
#029 Responding to Patient Emotion, 2nd ed Author(s): Bruce Ambuel PhD Introduction Listening to, recognizing, and responding to patient emotions is an essential skill for physicians who care for dying patients. We often think of this skill as innate—either we have the skill as an attribute of our personality, or we don’t. In fact the skill of responding empathetically to patient emotions can be learned. Here are eight tasks that guide you in responding to patient emotion: Listen to the patient. Listen – do not interrupt while the patient is talking. Patients and families facing end-of-life decisions want an opportunity to talk with their doctor about what they are thinking and feeling. Listen to yourself. Be aware of your own emotions. Your feelings of sadness, anger, anxiety, fear or happiness are often the first clue that a patient is communicating an important emotional message. Avoid the trap of quickly acting on your emotions. For example, if you find yourself feeling angry, do not tell the patient you are angry; instead use your feeling of anger as a cue to find out more about what the patient is saying. Reflect thoughts, feelings and behavior. Reflection means re-stating what a patient has said using their own words and phrases. Reflection 1) tells the patient that you are listening and care, giving permission to discuss sensitive topics; 2) allows the patient to listen to their own thoughts, heightening their self-awareness; and 3) allows the patient to confirm, correct or amplify upon your understanding. Example 1, Reflecting thoughts: Patient: This is a tough decision…I just can’t decide whether I want to enter a hospice program or continue with chemotherapy. Physician: You are having a hard time deciding between hospice and chemotherapy. Example 2, Reflecting emotions: Patient: I’ve been feeling run down and discouraged. I guess I’m a little overwhelmed. Physician: You have been feeling discouraged and overwhelmed …. Example 3, Reflecting behavior: Patient begins to cry. Physician: I see that you are crying…. Affirmation & respect. Patients and families take a risk when they share their emotions; affirm and support the patient. Examples: Thank you for sharing your feelings and thoughts. Or, I’m glad that you are talking with me about your feeling. Or, I can do a better job as your doctor when I know how you are feeling. Empathic curiosity. Be curious and request more information: I’d like to know more about this… Or, Please tell me more about the sadness you are feeling. Summarize/paraphrase. Restate the patient’s story in your own words. In contrast to reflection, paraphrase and summary involves interpretation and condensation of the patient’s narrative. An effective comment is brief yet captures essential meaning and emotion. We have been talking for awhile about how things are going for you. Let me see if I can summarize what you have said, then you can let me know if I’m on track… Make a plan. Sometimes a patient simply wants to talk about their feelings; other times, action may be important. Possible action steps include making changes in how you and the patient communicate, helping the patient identify sources of social support, and changing the plan of care. Find out what the patient is expecting—How can I help? Or, What, if anything, would make a difference for you? Offer Follow-up. I would like to check in with you next week and see how things are going. In the mean time, please let me know if you need to talk before then, OK? See Fast Facts : Delivering Bad News ( #6 , 11 ) and Dealing with anger ( #59 ). References Egener B. Empathy. In: Behavioral medicine in primary care: a practical guide. Feldman MD, Christensen JF, eds. Stamford, Connecticut: Appleton & Lange: 1997: pp8-14. Cole S, Bird J. The Medical Interview: The Three Function Approach. Second Edition. St. Louis, Missouri: Mosby; 2000. ACGME Competencies: Interpersonal and Communication Skills, Patient Care Keyword(s): Communication, Psychosocial and Spiritual Experience: Patients, Families, and Clinicians 
#030 Prognostication, 2nd ed Author(s): Eric J. Warm M.D. Doctors are poor prognosticators Physicians tend to be overly optimistic when dealing with prognosis. A study by Christakis illustrates this point (1). He asked 343 physicians to provide survival estimates for 468 terminally ill patients at the time of hospice referral. Only 20% of predictions were accurate (as defined as within 33% of actual survival). Overall, doctors overestimated by a factor of 5.3! Every type of doctor tended to overestimate, although the more experienced physicians had less error. Inaccurate predictions were given for all types of patients, including cancer patients and those with chronic non-malignant diseases. Interestingly, as the duration of the physician patient relationship increased, prognostic accuracy decreased. In other words, the longer a doctor knew his/her patient, the less likely he/she was to correctly predict prognosis. Why does this matter? Undue optimism may hurt patients in multiple ways. First of all, it may explain some of the findings of the SUPPORT trial (2). This study showed that a large number of do-not-resuscitate (DNR) orders are written in the last 2 days of life, and that physician knowledge about patient DNR preference is poor. Why review issues surrounding end-of-life (EOL) care when the prognosis is rosy? In the same vein, undue optimism may lead to late hospice referral. Hospice care, however, is most beneficial when utilized for months, not days, as commonly happens currently. Lastly, an overestimation of prognosis may cause patients to request futile care. Learning the true prognosis of a disease very late in the course is a difficult pill to swallow, and makes for an abrupt transition from curative/life-prolonging care to palliative care. Appropriate prognostic information is essential for informed advance planning decisions. This is often acutely true in the setting of the ‘DNR discussion.’ Murphy showed that people change EOL care decisions based on their perception of prognosis (3). He asked 371 adults age 65 or older if they wanted CPR in case of arrest during an acute illness. Before learning the true probability of survival 41% wanted CPR. After learning the true probability of CPR, only 22% wanted it. If asked about CPR wishes in the setting of a life-limiting illness, in which overall life expectancy was less than one year, only 5% wanted CPR after knowing accurate information about outcomes. What to do? Many reasons have been put forward for why we overestimate prognosis (see Christakis’ book Death Foretold [4]). Probably the most important step in correcting the problem is recognizing that it exists. Ask yourself, “Would I be surprised if my patient died in the next year?” Answering “no” should trigger a re-assessment of the patient’s current state and immediate future. There are many scientifically derived models of patient survival probability that can be used, and there are many well recognized clinical predictors. Metastatic cancer has the most predictable course (see Fast Fact #13 ); assessing where a patient is along the dying trajectory is relatively easy. Other diseases such as COPD or CHF are more difficult to predict (see Fast Facts #141 , 143 ). Each exacerbation can lead to remission (and future exacerbation) or death, and knowing which will occur on any given admission can be extremely challenging. This uncertainty, however, can be an excellent starting place for discussion with the patient; communicating that one of the possible outcomes of an exacerbation is death allows you both to plan accordingly. Finally, you may want to consider a second opinion for patients you are particularly close to. Present the data objectively to a colleague and ask them to prognosticate using the information alone. Studies by Christakis and others suggest that impartial observers are more accurate than physicians well invested in the patient-physician relationship. References Christakis NA, Lamont EB. Extent and Determinants of Error in Doctor’s Prognoses in Terminally Ill Patients: Prospective Cohort Study. BMJ. 2000; 320:469-472 The SUPPPORT Principal Investigators. A controlled trial to improve care for seriously ill hospitalized patients. The study to understand prognoses and preferences for outcomes and risks of treatments (SUPPORT). JAMA. 1995; 274:1591-1598. Murphy DJ, et al. The Influence of the Probability of Survival on Patient’s Preferences Regarding CPR. NEJM. 1994; 330:545-49. Christakis NA. Death Foretold : Prophecy and Prognosis in Medical Care. Chicago, IL: Univ of Chicago Press; 2000. ISBN: 0226104702. Lamont EB, Christakis NA. Complexities in prognostication in advanced cancer. JAMA. 2003; 290:98-104. Lamont EB and Christakis NA. Prognostic disclosure to patients with cancer near the end of life. Ann Int Med. 2001; 134:1096-1105. ACGME Competencies: Medical Knowledge, Patient Care Keyword(s): Prognosis 
#031 Confronting Personal Mortality, 2nd ed Author(s): Eric Warm MD Most of us fear our own death; it is part of the human experience. Various authors suggest that the desire to deny mortality is part of every physician's decision to enter the field of Medicine. When learning about taking care of the dying, we are often told to 'confront our own mortality'. However, asking people to suddenly confront their own mortality is a bit naïve. Young physicians may have no real context for this (unless they have had a near death experience). Confronting one's mortality typically means different things to different people and different things to the same person at various stages of life. Rather than making blanket statements about confronting mortality, it may be helpful to break it down into individual episodes, times when we feel particularly vulnerable, as windows to self-exploration. I recently told the following story at the end of a Grand Rounds presentation. A 49 year old patient of mine with severe emphysema was in the hospital for the third time in a year for pneumonia. Each admission was worse than the last. One afternoon as I came to see him, I paused at his door. Through the window I saw a cachectic man with pursed lip breathing hunched over a tray table. He was breathless and suffering. At that moment I could not get myself to open the door; it was too difficult for me. I walked around the hospital doing other things for an hour before I finally made it into his room. He said he felt terrible. I said I was sorry, and that I was giving him all the medicine I could think of. The conversation was brief and difficult—it was the same conversation we had the last time he was sick and it went no further than symptoms or treatments. Neither he nor I felt better after talking. Four months later I received an early morning call from the emergency department. My patient had presented in respiratory failure, was intubated, had three chest tubes placed for ruptured bullae, and died. In the words of the ER physician, 'it was ugly.’ Other than the housestaff asking if he wanted 'everything done' (he said yes), I had no discussion about end-of-life care/hopes/wishes with my patient. Two aspects of personal vulnerability hindered me. First, I have asthma, and my identification with this patients' dyspnea was painful for me. Second, every time I met with this patient I felt bad about the encounter, as though I had nothing to offer as his physician. I felt as if I had failed him because I had no cure. To avoid the feeling of failure, I avoided discussing issues surrounding his imminent death, and thus, failed him in another way. Had I been more self-aware of my own issues, I would have been able to identify the reasons I couldn't enter the room. Since then, I have learned to listen to my feelings – when I am avoiding something unpleasant, it usually means I am feeling vulnerable. My guess is that adding up these individual episodes when we feel vulnerable, becoming increasingly aware of self, is what is meant by the term confronting your own mortality. At the end of the Grand Rounds where I presented my story, I asked everyone to turn to the person next to him or her and tell their own story, the one that came to their mind as I was telling mine. The room boiled over with conversation. Reference Buckman R. Communication in palliative care: a practical guide. In: Doyle D, Hanke G, and MacDonald N, eds. Oxford Textbook of Palliative Medicine. 2nd Edition. New York, NY: Oxford University Press; 1998: pp141-156. ACGME Competencies: Professionalism Keyword(s): Psychosocial and Spiritual Experience: Patients, Families, and Clinicians 
#032 Grief and Bereavement, 2nd ed Author(s): James Hallenbeck MD Introduction Grief is a normal response to loss, any loss: a job, a limb, a life. Clinicians have an important role in facilitating healthy grieving, and observing for signs of complicated grief. Grief experienced by dying patients and loved-ones prior to and in anticipation of death is called anticipatory grief (or mourning); grief of loved-ones following a death is termed bereavement. This Fast Fact provides an overview of grief and bereavement. Grief is a normal response to loss that involves processes and tasks at emotional, cognitive and behavioral levels. The initial shock of learning of impending or actual loss evolves into a process of creating a new relationship between the grieving person and the person (or object) of loss. Grief tends to be experienced in waves, triggered predictably by new losses (such as a loss of functional status) or unpredictably, by seemingly trivial events. Over time the intensity of these waves tends to decrease. Grief does not have a set schedule; individuals progress through the grief process at different speeds. However, no progress, getting stuck in one phase of grief, can be cause for concern. Anticipatory grief for patients involves reviewing one's life; for families/friends it means looking to a future without the dying person. Byock has suggested that patients and families may wish to say to each other, in some way, 'Forgive me, I forgive you, thank you, I love you and good-bye.' People from different cultural backgrounds may differ in terms of how and what they want to say or do in preparation for death. Not knowing or acknowledging that a person is dying will likely delay or interfere with normal anticipatory grief. Grief reactions in dying patients may be confused with pain, depression, and even imminent death (e.g. social withdrawal may imply pain, depression, or anticipatory grief). Note: Neither pain nor depression are normal aspects of the dying experience, they should be carefully evaluated as both are treatable (See Fast Fact #43 ). Grief tends to be experienced as sadness, whereas depression is associated with lack of self-worth. The question, 'Are you sad or are you feeling depressed?' may help begin a dialog to help you distinguish between grief and clinical depression. What can the physician do to facilitate normal grieving? Be honest when discussing prognosis, goals and treatment options; nothing inhibits normal anticipatory grief more than ambiguity from the physician. Listen; open the door to meaningful discussion. Ask, 'How are you doing with this recent news?' “Are you scared?' 'Tell me what is going through your mind?” Ask for help – you are not the only health professional available to help with grief. Contact a nurse, social worker, chaplain or psychologist/psychiatrist if you need assistance. Assess for and aggressively treat pain and depression. References Byock I. The Four Things that Matter Most. New York, NY: Simon & Schuster; 2004. Markowitz AJ, Rabow MW. Caring for bereaved patients: 'All the doctors just suddenly go.” JAMA. 2002; 287(7):882. Rando TA. Clinical Dimensions of Anticipatory Mourning. Champaign, IL: Research Press; 2000. ACGME Competencies: Medical Knowledge, Patient Care Keyword(s): Psychosocial and Spiritual Experience: Patients, Families, and Clinicians 
#033 Ventilator Withdrawal Protocol, 2nd ed Author(s): Charles von Gunten MD, PhD and David E Weissman MD Introduction This is the first part of a three-part series on withdrawing ventilators in patients expected to die. Fast Fact #34 will review use of sedating medication for ventilator withdrawal and Fast Fact #35 will review information for families. Once it is decided that further aggressive medical care is incapable of meeting the desired goals of care for a ventilator-dependent patient, discussing ventilator withdrawal to allow death is appropriate (see Fast Fact #16 ). Such a decision is never easy for family members, doctors, nurses, and other critical care staff. All members of the care team should be involved and apprised of the decision-making process and have the opportunity to discuss the plan of care. Options for Ventilator Withdrawal Two methods have been described: 'immediate extubation' and 'terminal weaning.' The clinician's and patient's comfort, and the family's perceptions, should influence the choice. In immediate extubation, the endotracheal tube is removed after appropriate suctioning. Humidified air or oxygen is given to prevent the airway from drying; comfort medications are administered. This is the preferred approach to relieve discomfort if the patient is conscious, the volume of secretions is low, and the airway is unlikely to be compromised after extubation. In terminal weaning, the ventilator rate, positive end-expiratory pressure (PEEP), and oxygen levels are decreased while the endotracheal tube is left in place. Terminal weaning may be carried out over a period of as little as 30 to 60 minutes (see reference 3 for a protocol). If the patient survives they can be extubated with ongoing symptomatic care. If it is decided to leave the endo­tracheal tube in place (to, for instance, ensure the patency of the upper airway) a Briggs T-piece can be placed. Prior to Immediate Ventilator Withdrawal Encourage family to make arrangements for special music or rituals or support during and following the procedure. (See Fast Fact #35 ). Counsel families on potential outcomes following withdrawal. Document clinical findings, discussion with families/surrogates, and goals of care. Ensure that all monitors and alarms are turned off. Ensure that respiratory therapy or nursing staff is assigned to override alarms that cannot be turned off. Remove restraints and unnecessary medical paraphernalia. Turn off blood pressure support and paralytic medications; discontinue other life-sustaining treatments (e.g. artificial nutrition/hydration, antibiotics, dialysis). Maintain intravenous access for administration of sedating medications. Clear a space for family access to the bedside. Invite family into the room. If the patient is an infant or young child, offer to have the parent hold the child. Establish adequate symptom control prior to extubation (See Fast Fact #34 ). Have a syringe of a additional sedating medication at the bedside (midazolam, morphine, or lorazepam) to use in case distressing tachypnea or other symptoms. At the time of ventilator withdrawal Once you are sure the patient is comfortable, set the FiO 2 to 21% (room air); observe for signs of respiratory distress; adjust medication as needed to relieve distress before proceeding further. If the patient appears comfortable, prepare to remove the endotracheal tube; try a few moments of 'no assist' before the endotracheal tube is removed. A nurse or respiratory therapist should be stationed at the opposite side of the bed with a washcloth and oral suction catheter. When ready to proceed, deflate the endotracheal (ET) tube cuff. If possible, someone should be assigned to silence, turn off the ventilator, and move it out of the way. Once the cuff is deflated, remove the ET tube under a clean towel which collects most of the secretions and keep the ET tube covered with the towel. If oropharyngeal secretions are excessive, suction them away. The family and the nurse should have tissues for extra secretions, and for tears. The family should be encouraged to hold the patient's hand and provide assurances to their loved one. Be prepared to spend additional time with the family discussing questions concerns. After death occurs, encourage the family to spend as much time at the bedside as they require; provide acute grief support and follow-up bereavement support. References Marr L and Weissman DE. Withdrawal of ventilatory support from the dying adult patient. J Supp Onc. 2004; 2:283-288. Adapted from: Emanuel LL, von Gunten CF, Ferris FF, eds. Module 11: Withholding and Withdrawing Therapy. The EPEC Curriculum: Education for Physicians on End-of-life Care. Chicago, IL: The EPEC Project; 1999. http://www.EPEC.net . Rubenfeld GD, Crawford SW. Principles and practice of withdrawing life-sustaining treatment in the ICU. In: Curtis JR and Rubenfeld GD, eds. Managing Death in the Intensive Care Unit. New York, NY: Oxford University Press; 2001: pp127-147. ACGME Competencies: Medical Knowledge, Patient Care Keyword(s): ICU 
#034 Symptom Control for Ventilator Withdrawal in the Dying Patient, 2nd ed Author(s): Charles von Gunten MD, PhD and David E Weissman MD Introduction This is the second of a three-part series. Fast Fact #33 reviewed a protocol for removing the ventilator, and Fast Fact #35 will review information for families. The most common symptoms related to ventilator withdrawal are breathlessness and anxiety. Opioids and benzodiazepines are the primary medications used; concerns about unintended hastened death are exaggerated, particularly if established dosing guidelines are followed ( see Fast Fact #8 ). There is no medical or ethical justification for withholding sedating medication when death following ventilator withdrawal is the expected goal. However, increasing doses beyond the levels needed to achieve comfort/sedation, with the intention of hastening death, is euthanasia and is not acceptable/legal medical practice. Sedation should be provided to all patients, even those who are comatose. The doses needed to control symptoms depend on the neurological status of the patient and presence of drug tolerance (these same drugs are commonly used in routine ICU care). In all cases, a senior-level physician should remain at the bedside prior to and immediately following extubation until adequate symptom control is assured. Medication Protocol Discontinue paralytics; do not use paralytic agents for ventilator withdrawal. Administer an IV bolus dose and begin an IV continuous infusion of sedating medication (see below). Do not rely on subcutaneous or enteral drug administration as these take longer to work. For children, obtain dosing advice from a pharmacist or pediatric intensivist. Titrate drugs to control labored respirations and achieve the desired state of sedation prior to extubation. Testing the eyelid reflex is a common method of quickly assessing level of consciousness. Have additional medication drawn up and ready to administer at the bedside if needed. After ventilator withdrawal: If distress ensues immediate symptom control is needed. Use additional sedating medication (e.g. morphine 5-10 mg IV push q 10 min, and/or midazolam, 2-4 mg IV push q 10 min, until distress is relieved). Adjust infusion rates to maintain relief. Specific dosages are less important than the goal of symptom relief. A goal should be to keep the respiratory rate < 30 and eliminate grimacing and agitation. NOTE: The following regimens are commonly used; all require a bolus dose followed by a continuous infusion. Dose ranges are approximations and depend in part on patients’ prior exposure to opioids and benzodiazepines. Clinicians should use clinical judgment when deciding on what specific drugs and doses to use. Many institutions have policy and clinical guidelines about the use of opioids and sedatives in these circumstances. Clinicians unfamiliar with the use of these agents in the setting of ventilator withdrawal are urged to consult with an anesthesiologist, critical care specialist, or pain/palliative specialist prior to use. Regimen A: Morphine plus Midazolam (Adult doses) Good for comatose patients or patients with limited consciousness and/or patients with little prior exposure to these drugs (and thus less risk of tolerance). Bolus: Morphine 2-10 mg; Midazolam 1-2 mg Infusion: Morphine 50% of the bolus dose in mg/hr; Midazolam 1 mg/hr Regimen B: Pentobarbital (Adult doses) Good for the awake patient who can be expected to have respiratory distress following ventilator withdrawal. Bolus: 1-2 mg/kg (at rate of 50 mg/min) Infusion: 1-2 mg/kg/hr Regimen C: Propofol (Adult doses) Good for the awake patient who can be expected to have demonstrable respiratory distress following ventilator withdrawal. Bolus: 20-50 mg Infusion: 10-100 mg/hr References Rousseau PC. Palliative Sedation. Am J Hosp Pall Care. 2002; 19:295-297. Truog RD. Barbiturates in the care of the terminally ill. NEJM. 1992; 327:1678-1681. Chan JD, et al. Narcotic and benzodiazepine use after withdrawal of life support: Association with time to death? Chest. 2004; 126:286-293. Adapted from: Emanuel LL, von Gunten CF, Ferris FF, eds. Module 11: Withholding and Withdrawing Therapy. The EPEC Curriculum: Education for Physicians on End-of-life Care. Chicago, IL: The EPEC Project; 1999. http://www.EPEC.net . Rubenfeld GD, Crawford SW. Principles and practice of withdrawing life-sustaining treatment in the ICU. In Managing Death in the Intensive Care Unit. Curtis JR and Rubenfeld GD, eds. New York, NY: Oxford University Press; 2001: pp127-147. ACGME Competencies: Medical Knowledge, Patient Care Keyword(s): ICU 
#035 Information for Patients and Families About Ventilator Withdrawal, 2nd ed Author(s): Charles von Gunten MD, PhD and David E Weissman MD Introduction This is Part 3 of a three-part series on withdrawing ventilator withdrawal. Fast Fact #33 reviewed a protocol for removing the ventilator; Fast Fact #34 reviewed medications for symptom control. Physician counseling of families is a critical aspect of care for the dying patient who is to be removed from a ventilator. Ideally the family will be involved in the decision to withdraw the ventilator and thus apprised of the goals of care. Before withdrawal, the following issues should be discussed. Potential outcome of ventilator withdrawal Assuming all other life-sustaining treatments have been stopped, including artificial hydration and nutrition, there are several potential outcomes: rapid death within minutes (typically patients with sepsis on maximal blood pressure support), death within hours to days, or stable cardiopulmonary function leading to a different set of care plans, including potential hospital discharge. If the latter possibility is realistic, future management plans should be discussed prior to ventilator removal, since some families may desire to resume certain treatments, notably artificial hydration/nutrition. Generally, by the nature of the underlying illness and the established goals, it is fairly easy to predict which category will be operative, but all families should be prepared for some degree of prognostic uncertainty (see Fast Fact #30 ). The procedure of ventilator withdrawal Never make assumptions about what the family understands; describe the procedure in clear, simple terms and answer any questions. Families should be told before-hand the steps of withdrawal and whether or not it is planned/desired to remove the endotracheal tube. In addition, they should be counseled about the use of oxygen and medications for symptom control. Assure them that the patient’s comfort is of primary concern. Explain that labored breathing and signs of breathlessness may occur, but that they can be managed. Con¬firm that you will have medication available to manage any discomfort. Ensure they know that the patient will likely need to be kept asleep to control their symptoms and that involuntary moving, noisy or irregular breathing, or gasping do not reflect suffering if the patient is properly sedated or in a coma. Explain how the family, clergy and others can be at the bedside before, during and after withdrawal. If asked, explain that they can show love and support through touch, wiping of the patient’s forehead, holding a hand and talking to him or her. Support the decision Even though a family is able to make a definite decision for ventilator withdrawal, such a decision is always emotionally charged. Families may constantly second-guess themselves, especially if the patient appears to linger following ventilator withdrawal. Physician support, guidance and leadership is crucial, as the family will be looking to the physician to ensure them that they are “doing the right thing.” Furthermore, it is common for families to have concerns that their decision constitutes euthanasia or assisted suicide—explicit counseling from a physician will be needed. Finally, support needs to continue following death during the bereavement period (see Fast Fact #22 ). References Adapted from: Emanuel LL, von Gunten CF, Ferris FF, eds. Module 11: Withholding and Withdrawing Therapy. The EPEC Curriculum: Education for Physicians on End-of-life Care. Chicago, IL: The EPEC Project; 1999. http://www.EPEC.net. Rubenfeld GD, Crawford SW. Principles and practice of withdrawing life-sustaining treatment in the ICU. In Managing Death in the Intensive Care Unit. Curtis JR and Rubenfeld GD, eds. New York, NY: Oxford University Press; 2001: pp127-147. ACGME Competencies: Interpersonal and Communication Skills, Patient Care Keyword(s): ICU 
#036 Calculating Opioid Dose Conversions, 2nd ed Author(s): Robert Arnold MD and David E Weissman MD Introduction A variety of published conversion tables exist to provide clinicians a rough guide for making calculations when switching between different opioid routes or preparations. Listed below are methods for common conversions using standard published conversion ratios. The examples assume a change in drug or route at a time of stable pain control using equianalgesic doses. See Fast Fact #2 about conversions involving transdermal fentanyl; Fast Fact #75 and #86 about methadone; and #181 about oxymorphone. Caution: Published values in equianalgesic tables should be considered a rough clinical guide when making dose conversions; substantial inter-individual variation exists. The final prescribed dose needs to take into account a patients’ age, renal, pulmonary and hepatic function; their current pain level and opioid side effects such as sedation; as well as prior and current opioid use. Opioid Equianalgesic Conversion Ratios for use with the following examples: Morphine 10 mg parenteral = Morphine 30 mg oral = Hydromorphone 1.5 mg parenteral = Hydromorphone 7.5 mg oral (see Reference 1). Change route, keeping drug the same (e.g. oral to IV morphine) Example: Change 90 mg q12 Extended Release Morphine to Morphine by IV continuous infusion Calculate the 24 hour current dose: 90mg q 12 = 180 mg Morphine/24 hours Use the oral to parenteral equianalgesic ratio: 30 mg PO Morphine = 10 mg IV Morphine Calculate new dose using ratios: 180/30 x 10 = 60 mg IV Morphine/24 hours or 2.5 mg/hour infusion Some experts recommend starting the new opioid at 75% of the calculated dose to account for inter-individual variation in first pass clearance. Change drug, keep the same route (e.g. po morphine to po hydromorphone) There is incomplete cross-tolerance between different opioids, but the exact amount will differ. Thus, equianalgesic tables are only approximations. Depending on age and prior side effects, most experts recommend starting a new opioid at 50% of the calculated equianalgesic dose, in the setting of well-controlled pain. Example: Change 90 mg q 12 Extended Release Morphine to oral Hydromorphone. Calculate the 24 hour current dose: 90 Q12 x 2 = 180 mg PO Morphine/24 hrs Use the equianalgesic ratio: 30 mg PO Morphine = 7.5 mg PO Hydromorphone Calculate new dose using ratios: 180/30 X 7.5 = 45 mg oral Hydromorphone/24 hours. Reduce dose 50% for cross-tolerance: 45 x 0.5 = 22 mg/24 hours = 4 mg q4h Changing drug and route (e.g. oral morphine to IV hydromorphone) Example: Change from 90 mg q12 Extended Release Morphine to IV Hydromorphone as a continuous infusion. Calculate the 24 hour current dose: 90 Q12 x 2 = 180 mg PO Morphine/24 hrs Use the equianalgesic ratio of PO to IV morphine: 30 mg po Morphine = 10 mg IV Morphine Calculate new dose using ratios: 180/30 x 10 = 60 mg IV Morphine/24 hours Use the equianalgesic ratio of IV Morphine to IV Hydromorphone: 10 mg Morphine = 1.5 mg Hydromorphone Calculate new dose using ratios: 60/10 x 1.5 = 9 mg IV Hydromorphone/24 hours Reduce dose 50% for cross-tolerance: 9 x 0.5 = 4.5 mg/24 hours = 0.2 mg IV continuous infusion References Gammaitoni AR, Fine P, Alvarez N, McPherson ML. Clinical application of opioid equianalgesic data. Clin J Pain. 2003; 19:286-297. Pereira J et al. Equianalgesic dose rations for opioids: a critical review and proposals for long-term dosing. J Pain Sym Manage. 2001; 22:672-687. Anderson R et al. Accuracy in equianalgesic dosing: conversion dilemmas. J Pain Sym Manage. 2001; 21:397-406. ACGME Competencies: Medical Knowledge Keyword(s): Pain – Opioids 
#037 Pruritus, 2nd ed Author(s): Charles von Gunten MD and Frank Ferris MD Background Pruritus (itching) is a common and often distressing symptom near the end of life. The itch sensation may arise from stimulation of the skin itch receptor via unmyelinated C fibers, or itch may arise as a central phenomenon without skin involvement (e.g. opioid induced pruritus). Although histamine causes pruritus, many patients with pruritis show no signs of histamine release. Besides histamine, serotonin, prostaglandins, kinins, proteases and physical stimuli have all been implicated as mediators of pruritus. Common Causes Dermatological (dryness, wetness, irritation, eczema, psoriasis) Metabolic (hepatic failure, renal failure, hypothyroidism) Hematologic (iron deficiency, polycythemia, thrombocytosis, leukemia, lymphoma) Drugs (opioids, aspirin, drug reactions) Infectious (scabies, lice, candida) Allergy (urticaria, contact dermatitis, drug reactions) Psychogenic Management Management of pruritus involves eliminating the cause when possible. Symptomatic strategies include: Moisturizers: Dryness (xerosis) is very common and may exacerbate other causes. The mainstay of treatment is skin hydration. Note: Most OTC preparations only have small amounts of moisturizer—they are mostly water. Serious dryness requires emollients and moisturizers (such as petroleum jelly) that patients find oily or greasy. Nevertheless, they may applied after bathing, over damp skin, with a superficial covering. Cooling agents (e.g. Calamine and/or Menthol in aqueous cream, 0.5%-2%) are mildly antipruritic. They may act as a counterirritant or anesthetic. A more direct way to anesthetize the skin is with the eutectic mixture of local anesthetics lidocaine and prilocaine (EMLA cream). Antihistamines may be helpful in relieving itch when associated with histamine release. Morphine causes non-immune mediated histamine release from mast cells. Although there is not much supporting research, many report benefits of combining H1 and H2 receptor subtype antihistamines. These may have central effects as well as peripheral antihistaminergic effects. Doxepin (10-30 mg PO at bedtime), a tricyclic antidepressant, is a very potent antihistamine and may help in more refractory cases. Topical steroids may be helpful in the presence of skin inflammation. These are best applied in ointment rather than cream formulations to alleviate dryness. Systemic steroids have been used in refractory cases. Other: An old-fashioned but effective remedy is immersion in an oatmeal bath (e.g. Aveeno). More recent pharmacological treatments include cholestyramine for cholestatic pruritis, and in other selected patients, ondansetron, paroxetine or naloxone. References Fleisher A, Michaels JR. Pruritus. Berger A, Portenoy RK, Weissman DE, eds. In: Principles & Practice of Supportive Oncology. Philadelphia PA: Lippincott-Raven Publishers; 1998: pp245-250. Krajnik M, Zylicz Z. Understanding pruritis in systemic disease. J Pain Symp Manage. 2001; 21:151-168. Wilde MI, Markham A. Ondansetron: a review of its pharmacology and preliminary clinical findings in novel applications. Drugs. 1996; 52:773-794. Zylicz Z, Smits C, Chem D, Krajnik M. Paroxetive for pruritis in advanced cancer. J Pain Symptom Manage. 1998; 16:121-124. ACGME Competencies: Medical Knowledge, Patient Care Keyword(s): Non-Pain Symptoms and Syndromes 
#038 Discussing Hospice, 2nd ed Author(s): Charles F von Gunten MD, PhD, FACP Introduction Hospice discussions with seriously ill patients should always take place in the context of the larger goals of care, using a step-wise approach. Fast Facts#82 , 87 , and 90 discuss the hospice benefit and regulations in more detail. Establish the setting Ensure comfort and privacy; sit down next to the patient. Ask if family members or others should be present. Introduce the subject: I’d like to talk with you about the overall goals for your care. What does the patient understand? Ask an open-ended question to elicit patient understanding about their current health situation. It is important to get the patient talking – if the doctor is doing all the talking, it is unlikely that the rest of the conversation will go well. Consider starting with phrases such as: What do you understand about your current health situation? Or, What have the doctors told you about your condition? If the patient does not know/appreciate their current status this is time to review that information. An informed decision about hospice is only possible if the patient has a clear understanding of her or his illness and prognosis. What does the patient expect? Next, ask the patient to consider the future. What do you expect in the future? What goals do you have for the time you have left—what is important to you? This step allows you to listen while the patient describes a real or imagined future. Most patients with advanced disease use this opening to voice their thoughts about dying—typically mentioning comfort, family, and home, as their goals of care. If there is a sharp discontinuity between what you expect and what the patient expects, this is the time to clarify. Listen carefully to the patient’s responses; most patients have thought a lot about dying, they only need permission to talk about what they have been thinking. Setting up the conversation in this way permits the physician to respond with clarifying and confirming comments such as: So what you’re saying is, you want to be as independent as possible and stay out of the hospital. Or, What you’ve said is, you don’t want to be a burden on your family. Discuss Hospice Care Use language that the patient will understand; give information in small pieces. Never say, There’s nothing more we can do. “Nothing” is euphemistic and easily misinterpreted; to a patient “nothing” means abandonment. Summarize the patient’s goals as part of your introducing a discussion of hospice care: You’ve told me you want to be as independent and comfortable as possible. Hospice care is the best way I know to help you achieve those goals. Listen carefully to the response; patients often have a distorted view of hospice care, others have never heard the term. Ask what the term means to them; patients frequently describe hospice as a place to go to die or what you do when you give up. Probe for previous experiences or how they developed their point of view. Respond by describing hospice as A program that helps the patient and family achieve the goals you’ve just described; it’s a team of people that help meet the patient’s and family’s physical, psychological, social and spiritual needs . Offer to ask someone from the hospice program to meet with them to give information. Offer your recommendation From what you’ve told me, I would recommend that hospice care begin so that I can do the best possible job in meeting the goals we discussed today. I think it would be best if we got hospice involved. Normalize your recommendation: I always ask hospice to get involved for my patients at this stage of their illness. Reinforce that entering hospice care does not mean that the patient can never return to the office or hospital for care, that the decision is revocable, and that the patient can continue seeing their current physicians. Respond to emotions Strong emotions are common when discussing death. Typically the acute emotional response is brief. The most profound initial response a physician can make may be silence, providing a reassuring touch, and offering facial tissues (see Fast Fact #29 ). Establish a plan Summarize the plan : I’ll ask hospice representatives to come by to give information, then you and I can discuss it. References von Gunten CF. Discussing Hospice Care. J Clin Oncol. 2002; 20:1419-1424. Casarett DJ, Quill TE. “I’m not ready for hospice”: Strategies for timely hospice discussions. Ann Int Med. 2007; 146:443-449. ACGME Competencies: Interpersonal and Communication Skills, Patient Care Keyword(s): Communication 
#039 Using Naloxone, 2nd ed Author(s): Colleen J Dunwoody MS, RN and Robert Arnold MD Background Naloxone (Narcan®), a semisynthetic opioid antagonist, is indicated for the complete or partial reversal of life-threatening CNS/respiratory depression induced by opioids. Naloxone is often inappropriately used in the hospital setting, administered as a full ampule (0.4 mg) in response to physiologically normal opioid-induced decrease in respiratory rate or mild sedation. This probably comes from application of principles of use in the Emergency Department to other settings. Of note, it is normal to have a lower respiratory rate during sleep, especially on opioids. Mild bradypnea, which is not associated with physiologic consequences like hypoxemia, should be closely monitored. Depending on the dose administered, naloxone administration to a patient physically dependent on opioids will cause the abrupt return of pain and can precipitate an abstinence (withdrawal) syndrome, with symptoms ranging from mild anxiety, irritability and muscle aches to life-threatening tachycardia and hypertension. Once thought to be devoid of side effects, naloxone can cause cardiovascular collapse and pulmonary edema, probably through abrupt increase in sympathetic nervous system activity associated with opioid reversal. Key Teaching Points Review treatment goals; naloxone administration is not indicated for patients on opioids who are dying (see Fast Fact #3 ), as all dying patients will at some point have an altered mentation and respiratory changes. It may be necessary to write specific orders not to administer naloxone. Patients should meet all of the following criteria before naloxone is administered: Depressed mental status: difficult to arouse or unarousable (If the patient wakes to voice or light shake, the diagnosis is sleeping, not opioid overdose). Shallow respirations or rate less than 8/minute, associated with evidence of inadequate ventilation (e.g. low oxygen saturation, hypotension). Note: some people breathe at 6-8 per minute when they sleep yet are well ventilated. Stop opioid administration. Dilute 0.4 mg naloxone (one ampule) with normal saline to a total volume of 10 ml (1 ml = 0.04 mg naloxone). Remind the patient to breathe; though narcotized, patients report hearing concerned staff and being unable to open their eyes or respond. Reminders to “take a deep breath” are often followed. Administer 1 ml IV (0.04 mg) q1min until the patient is responsive. A typical response is noted after 2-4 ml with deeper breathing and greater level of arousal. Gradual naloxone administration should prevent acute opioid withdrawal. If the patient does not respond to a total of 0.8 mg naloxone (2 amps), consider other causes of sedation and respiratory depression (e.g. benzodiazepines, stroke). The duration of action of naloxone is considerably shorter than the duration of action of most short-acting opioids. A repeat dose of naloxone, or even a continuous naloxone infusion, may be needed. Wait until there is sustained improvement in consciousness before restarting opioids at a lower dose. Final notes: After the patient is stable, review events leading up to the patient requiring naloxone and address oversights and errors which lead to this complication of opioid therapy. Review your institution’s policy on naloxone administration. Is it appropriate? If not, write one; see (2) for a recommended nursing protocol. References Burke DF, Dunwoody CJ. Naloxone: A Word of Caution. Orthopaedic Nursing. 1990; 9:44-46. McCaffery M, Pasero C, eds. Pain: Clinical Manual. 2nd edition. St. Louis MO: Mosby, 1999: p270. O’Malley-Dafner L, Davies P. Naloxone-Induced Pulmonary Edema. AJN. 2000; 100(11):24AA-JJ. ACGME Competencies: Medical Knowledge, Patient Care Keyword(s): Pain – Opioids 
#040 Pressure Ulcer Management: Prevention (Part 1), 2nd ed Author(s): Frank Ferris MD and Charles F von Gunten MD Background This Fast Fact discusses the staging and prevention of pressure ulcers; Fast Fact #41 discusses management. Poor attention to skin care in the dying patient will result in pain, odor, swelling, reduced quality of life and increased care demands for family and other caregivers. Skin can withstand 30-60 minutes of poor perfusion, but not longer. Pressure ulcers result from ischemia due to pressure closing the microarterioles, particularly at pressure points such as the heels, sacrum and elbows. Intrinsic risk factors for ulcer development are limited mobility, conditions that reduce tissue oxygenation, age-related changes in skin, and cachexia. Extrinsic factors are physical forces such as friction, moisture, and shear forces. Prevention of ulcers is the highest level of care; bedbound patients need to be turned regularly and/or need a pressure-reducing surface. Skin should be protected from friction, moisture and shear. High-risk areas should have either a thin film or hydrocolloid dressings applied. Ulcer Progression Stage I. The heralding lesion of skin ulceration is non-blanchable erythema. Stage II. Partial-thickness skin loss involving epidermis, dermis, or both. The ulcer is superficial and looks like an abrasion or shallow crater or blister. Stage III . Full thickness skin loss involving subcutaneous tissue. The ulcer may extend down to, but not through, the underlying fascia. The ulcer looks like a deep crater, with or without undermining of adjacent tissue. Stage IV. The ulcer is deep enough to include necrosis and damage to underlying muscle, bone, and/or other supporting structures such as tendon or joint capsule. Undermining of adjacent skin and sinus tracts may also be present. Pressure Reducing Surfaces There are 3 groups of support surfaces that have demonstrated effectiveness; some need to be ordered by a physician. Air or water mattress overlays (e.g. Roho)— ideal for most patients to prevent pressure ulcers. Order for patients at risk for pressure ulcers. Low-air-loss beds (e.g. Kenn-air, Dyna-Care, Sof-Care) can be used for high-risk patients or patients with existing ulcers to prevent worsening or to help with healing. Air-fluidized beds (e.g. Clinatron, Fluid-air) are reserved for patients needing maximum pressure reduction and pressure relief. Patients, however, frequently describe them as overly confining (even “coffin-like”) and they are very expensive (e.g. a Clinitron bed may lease for > $100/day). Note: Simple foam pads are often ineffective. If they are used, particularly in the home, they should be laid one on top of the other. If a hand is placed under the pads, there should be at least 1 inch of non-compressed foam between the hand and the patient. Never use round cushions (a.k.a. donuts); they occlude blood flow and do not prevent ulcers. Professional assessment and design is needed for special pressure reducing cushions (e.g. for wheelchairs). References Walker P. The pathophysiology and management of pressure ulcers. In:Topics in Palliative Care, Volume 3. Portenoy RK, Bruera E, eds. New York, NY: Oxford University Press; 1998: pp 253-270. Walker P. Update on pressure ulcers. Principles & Practice of Supportive Oncology Updates. 2000; 3(6):1-11. ACGME Competencies: Medical Knowledge, Patient Care Keyword(s): Non-Pain Symptoms and Syndromes 
#041 Pressure Ulcer Management: Debridement & Dressings (Part 2), 2nd ed Author(s): Charles von Gunten, MD and Frank Ferris, MD Background Fast Fact #40 discussed the staging and prevention of pressure ulcers; this Fast Fact discusses their management. The first step in deciding how to manage pressure ulcers is an assessment of whether or not the wound is likely to heal. If the patient has a prognosis of months to years, adequate nutrition, and blood flow to the tissue, then healing is possible. If the patient has a prognosis of days to weeks, anorexia/cachexia, and/or the wound has inadequate perfusion, then symptom control alone is appropriate and uncomfortable/burdensome treatments are not appropriate. Debridement Always provide adequate analgesia! Necrotic tissue must be removed for ulcer healing; surgical debridement is the fastest and most effective method when there is healthy surrounding tissue. Note: If the patient is close to dying, and/or the wound will never heal, then debridement should not be attempted. Debridement gels (such as Hypergel, Santyl, Nu-gel) are applied onto an ulcer under an occlusive dressing (such as DuoDerm), are available for ulcers that don’t require surgery or when surgical debridement is incomplete. These products come with or without enzymes to encourage autolytic or enzymatic debridement. For minimally necrotic ulcers, occlusive dressings such as DuoDerm, changed weekly, promote autolysis. A commonly prescribed form of mechanical debridement is the use of saline, wet-dry dressings. This treatment actually retards healing by pulling off new epithelial cells as part of healthy granulation tissue; its use for the treatment of skin ulcers should be abandoned. Antimicrobials Ulcer healing is delayed if there is bacterial infection within the wound bed. Erythema, purulent exudate and fever are signs of infection. Cleansing and application of topical antibiotics may be sufficient for superficial infection with minimal surrounding erythema. Systemic antibiotics are indicated for deep/surrounding tissue infection, or if ulcer healing is delayed. Cleanse wounds that are expected to heal with non-cytotoxic fluids (e.g. saline). Cytotoxic fluids (e.g. Betadine) will kill granulation tissue. Clinical Pearl: do not cleanse an ulcer with any fluid you wouldn’t put in your eye if you want the ulcer to heal. Dressings Living tissue requires moisture for transport of oxygen and nutrients. A moist ulcer environment promotes the migration of fibroblasts and epithelial cells; growth factors are present in the serous exudate that speed healing. In contrast, a dry environment is conducive to necrosis and eschar. There are 6 classes of dressings distinguished by the wear time and whether you want to add or remove fluid in order to maintain the ideal moist, interactive ulcer-healing environment. A dry ulcer needs to have moisture added through a hypotonic gel (donates water). With wet exudates, a hypertonic gel or foam is used to remove water. Polyurethane foams (LYOfoam, Allevyn, Nu-Derm, Flexzan): most absorptive; used under a covering secondary dressing. Alginates (Kaltostat, Sorbsan): dessicate an overly wet wound, prevent maceration of surrounding skin from excess fluid, and are hemostatic and may reduce infection risk. Hydrogels (IntraSite, Elasto-Gel, ClearSite, Aquasorb): used for wounds with larger volumes of exudate. Require a secondary dressing to secure. Hydrocolloid wafers (DuoDerm, Comfeel, Tegasorb, Restore): promote autolysis, angiogenesis and granulation. Self-adhesive. Remain in place for 5-7 days. Often used to “seal” a wound that is otherwise clean in order to promote healing. Can also be used to seal an underlying dressing in order to maintain a moist environment in which the wound can heal. Note: do not to use an occlusive dressing if there is a substantial risk of infection. Thin films (OpSite, Tegaderm): for skin at risk or Stage I pressure ulcers. Can also hold another type of absorbent dressing in place. Cotton Gauze: used to cover the primary dressing. Rarely an appropriate dressing for a significant skin ulcer. Note: Saline wet-to-dry dressings are only useful for mechanical debridement. References Walker P. The pathophysiology and management of pressure ulcers. In:Topics in Palliative Care, Volume 3. Portenoy RK, Bruera E, eds. New York, NY: Oxford University Press; 1998: pp 253-270. Walker P. Update on pressure ulcers. Principles & Practice of Supportive Oncology Updates. 2000; 3(6):1-11. ACGME Competencies: Medical Knowledge, Patient Care Keyword(s): Non-Pain Symptoms and Syndromes 
#042 Broaching the Topic of a Palliative Care Consultation with Patients and Families, 2nd ed Author(s): Robert Arnold MD and David E Weissman MD Introduction Palliative care consultative services are becoming commonplace in academic and community hospitals. Patients and families often, although not always, have negative perceptions of palliative care and hospice – viewing such a discussion as signaling that the physician is “giving up on the patient” and that the reality of impending death must be faced. For the attending physician, the decision to convey to a patient and family that a consultation is needed can provoke anxiety. Physicians may fear such a discussion will provoke anxiety, anger or a sense of hopelessness. This Fast Fact provides tips for beginning a discussion leading to a visit by a palliative care consultation team. First, decide why you want assistance from the palliative care team. Typically, physicians seek assistance in four domains: 1) pain and non-pain symptom assessment and management; 2) assistance in making difficult decisions, usually about continued use or withdrawal of potentially life-prolonging treatments such as feeding tubes, antibiotics, dialysis, or ventilators; 3) assistance in planning for the most appropriate care setting to meet patient/family goals for end-of-life care; and 4) providing psychological support to patients, families and the health care team. Second, contact the palliative care team. Discuss your reason(s) for consultation along with pertinent details of the patient’s history and family support structure. Describe both what your goals are for the consultation, as well as what the family’s/patient’s goals may be. This is a good time to discuss any concerns you have about using the term palliative care with the patient or family. Third, engage the patient/family in a discussion of the current medical condition and goals of care. Introduce the topic of a consultation by saying: To best meet some of the goals we’ve been discussing (fill in with the goals mentioned by the family/patient) I’d like to have some consultants from the Palliative Care Team visit with you. You can follow this by saying, They are experts in treating the symptoms you are experiencing (fill in symptom). They are also good at helping your family deal with all the changes brought on by your illness; they can answer your questions about (fill in previously discussed patient questions). You should not say that the reason you are asking Palliative care to be involved is “that there is nothing more to do” or because “I have nothing more to offer.” Talk about the positive goals Palliative Care can help you and the patient achieve. Finally, emphasize your continued involvement: You and I will talk about the recommendations of the palliative care experts. I'll make sure all your questions are answered. This can help relieve fears of abandonment. If a patient or family reacts negatively to the suggestion for a consultation, explore their concerns. Someone may have mentioned palliative care and this may have negative connotations to them. Ask, What experience do you have with hospice/palliative care? What are your concerns? It may be important to discuss that palliative care is compatible with aggressively treating the underlying disease. Emphasize the positive aspects of what palliative care can do, rather than focusing on how the palliative care team will help them accept death and dying. After all, the goal of palliative care is to achieve the best possible quality of life through relief of suffering, control of symptoms and restoration of functional capacity, while remaining sensitive to the patient and family’s values. Palliative Care guides the patient and family as they face disease progression and changing goals of care, and helps those who wish to address issues of life completion and life closure. References Weissman DE. Consultation in Palliative Medicine. Arch Int Med. 1997; 157:733-737. Last Acts Campaign Task Force on Palliative Care. Precepts of Palliative Care. J Pall Med. 1998; 1:109-115. ACGME Competencies: Interpersonal and Communication Skills, Patient Care, System-Based Practice Keyword(s): Communication, Psychosocial and Spiritual Experience: Patients, Families, and Clinicians 
#043 Is It Grief of Depression?, 2nd ed Author(s): VJ Periyakoil MD Background Distinguishing between a dying patient’s normal grief and a major depression is a part of routine care for patients near the end-of-life. This Fast Fact will review the definitions and clinical features that distinguish these conditions. See Fast Facts #7 and #32 for further discussions of depression in advanced cancer and an introduction to grief. Definitions Preparatory (or anticipatory) grief. This is the grief, 'that the terminally ill patient has to undergo in order to prepare himself for his final separation from this world' (1). Features include rumination about the past, withdrawal from family/friends, and periods of sadness, crying or anxiety. Preparatory Grief is a normal, not pathological, life cycle event. Depression. Clinically significant depression in a population of dying patients is likely somewhat more common (25-77%) than in the general population (2). However, depression is not an inevitable part of the dying experience and is treatable. Somatic symptoms (anorexia, weight changes, constipation, etc.) are often present as a part of the normal dying process and may not help to distinguish between preparatory grief and depression. Feelings of guilt, hopelessness, worthlessness, and suicidal ideation are the key factors that differentiate grief from depression. When in doubt, treat for depression. Utilize mental health professionals when available. The following additional points are offered to help the clinician distinguish between preparatory grief and depression. Distinguishing preparatory grief from depression Temporal Variation. A temporal variation of mood is normal in preparatory grief—a mixture of “good and bad days.” In contrast, persistent flat affect or dysphoria is characteristic of depression. Depression is a pathological state; patients can 'get stuck' in this state without treatment. Self-Image. A disturbed self-esteem is not typically seen in grief while this is a common feature of depression. Overwhelming and persistent feelings of worthlessness to others and of being a burden are common in depression. Distressing guilt is usually generalized to all facets of life in depression, while in grief, the guilt is focused around specific issues (e.g. not being able to attend a child’s wedding). Hope. A grieving patient's hope shifts, but is not lost. (Hope may shift from a hope for cure to hope for life prolongation to hope for dying well). In contrast, the depressed patient will comment on feelings of hopelessness and helplessness. Anhedonia. The ability to feel pleasure is not lost in preparatory grief. Note: grieving patients often need social interaction to help them through the grief process. Anhedonia is an important clue to underlying depression. Response to Support. Social support helps provide the acceptance and assistance necessary for completion of grief work (3). While social interaction may be helpful in some depressed patients, it will typically not provide the assistance necessary to resolve depression. Active Desire for an Early Death. An active desire for an early death is not typical of preparatory grief. A persistent, active desire for an early death in a patient, whose symptomatic and social needs have been reasonably met, is suggestive of clinical depression (4). References Kubler-Ross E. On Death and Dying. New York, NY: Simon and Schuster; 1997: pp123-124. EPEC Project Module 6: Anxiety, Delirium, Depression. In: Emanuel LL, von Gunten CF, Ferris FF, eds. The EPEC Curriculum: Education for Physicians on End-of-life Care. Chicago, IL: The EPEC Project; 1999. http://www.EPEC.net. Education on Palliative and End-of-Life Care. http://www.epec.net. 1999. Rando TA. Grief, Dying, and Death. Clinical Interventions for the Caregiver. Champaign, IL: Research Press Company; 1984. Chochinov HM, et al. Desire for death in the terminally ill. Am J of Psychiatry. 1995; 152:1185-91. Billings JA, Block SD. Depression. J Pall Care. 1995; 11:48-54. Block SD, for the ACP-ASIM End-of-Life Care Consensus Panel. Assessing and managing depression in the terminally ill patient. Annals Intern Med. 2000; 132:209-218. Block SD. Psychological considerations, growth, and transcendence at the end of life: the art of the possible. JAMA. 2001; 285:2898-905. ACGME Competencies: Medical Knowledge, Patient Care Keyword(s): Psychosocial and Spiritual Experience: Patients, Families, and Clinicians 
#044 Changing the Status Quo-Quality Improvement, 2nd ed Author(s): Joanne Lynn MD, Sarah Myers MPH, and David E Weissman MD Introduction How do you change the status quo? What can you do when the system of care does not support best practice? There are relatively easy, and often inexpensive ways to test new ideas and solutions for improving care on a small scale, and then to improve upon those ideas to foster even more dramatic improvement. Continuous Quality Improvement using the Plan-Do-Study-Act (PDSA) cycle is a successful model to move a care system closer and closer to the desired change. The PDSA process teaches participants insights into their own care system and how it can work better. This model requires a team of change agents to set an aim, implement a change, measure the effect, decide what they have learned, try another change, and repeat the process. There are three key questions to answer in the PDSA process: 1) What goal are you trying to accomplish and how do you know there is a problem? 2) What changes can you make that will result in improvement? 3) How will you know that a change is an improvement? An example of using the PDSA cycle is presented below. PLAN: Demonstrating that a problem exists and defining the goal. The residency program director feels that all residents out-perform the national average on pain management, however, the nursing staff disagrees and has brought their concern to the program director. Working together, the program director, two nurses and two residents decide to gather data on the oncology unit, starting with pain assessment documentation. After first reviewing national pain assessment guidelines, five patient charts were reviewed every other day for two weeks; the team discovers that 15% of patients report pain intensity scores greater than 5 on a 10 point scale for > 6 hrs and only 20% have documented assessment in the physician notes. This data confirms the nurses’ impression and convinces the program director that a change is needed. The team sets a goal that, within one month, all patients will have physician pain assessment notes and <10% will report pain intensity scores greater than 5 for more than 2 hours. DO: Defining the necessary changes. The team begins an improvement cycle that includes three changes: 1) daily reminder of the goals at morning report; 2) scheduling a one-hour pain assessment lecture for residents; and 3) weekly e-mail reminders of the goals to the attending physician. STUDY: Measuring the effect of change. Reviewing charts over the following month reveals no improvement in pain assessments or scores. The team reviews the data and decides they need more information to plan the next change. ACT: Make changes based on what is learned. A portion of a future morning report and faculty meeting is used to gather information from residents/faculty as to why they believe pain intensity scores are not improving. They find that pain assessment is just too easy to skip over in the press of other issues. Thus, no one is able to confirm that physician pain assessments are being done or that patients are comfortable. PLAN: The team develops a new strategy: over the next month the team will make pain a 5th vital sign and residents will learn new pain assessment skills through an experiential education program. DO: The nurses start checking pain as a 5th vital sign. All residents complete a pain assessment skills training program. Subsequently, the STUDY-ACT part of the cycle finds substantial improvement. Once a change strategy has led to documented improvement, the team can choose to incorporate it into regular practice, spread it to other units within the institution (e.g. by working to make pain a 5th vital sign institution-wide), and set additional aims for quality improvement using the PDSA model. ‘By Next Tuesday’ Most improvement efforts fail because excessive time is spent considering, studying and meeting. Teams should ask, 'What is the largest, most informative change we can make by next Tuesday?' This will not be the only change a team should make, and probably will not be the most important one. But by making a change 'by next Tuesday,' teams can break the inertia that keeps many improvement efforts from getting off the ground. References and Resources Lynn J, Nolan K, Kabcenell A, Weissman DE, et al. Reforming Care for Persons Near the End of Life: The Promise of Quality Improvement. Ann Int Med. 2002; 137: 116-122. Langley GL, Nolan KM, Nolan TW, Norman CL, Provost LP. The Improvement Guide: A Practical Approach to Enhancing Organizational Performance. San Francisco, CA: Jossey-Bass; 1996. Lynn J, Schuster JL, The Center to Improve Care of the Dying, and The Institute for Healthcare Improvement. Improving Care for the End of Life: A Sourcebook for Clinicians and Managers. New York, NY: Oxford University Press; 2000. RAND Center to Improve Care of the Dying. Currently known as Palliative Care Policy Center. Available at http://www.medicaring.org . Healthcare Quality Improvement Resources. Americans for Better Care of the Dying. Available at: http://www.abcd-caring.org/resources.htm . ACGME Competencies: Practice-based Learning and Improvement, System-based Practice Keyword(s): Ethics, Law, Policy Health Systems 
#045 Medical Management of Bowel Obstruction, 2nd ed Author(s): Charles F von Gunten MD, PhD and J Cameron Muir MD Background Malignant bowel obstruction is a common oncologic complication; most common in ovarian and colon cancer. Symptoms include abdominal pain, colicky and/or continuous, as well as nausea and vomiting. Treatment options include surgical correction, placement of a venting gastrostomy tube, stent placement across the obstructed site, or medical management (see Fast Fact #119 for a discussion of interventional options). The need to rely solely on medical management is common, especially when the patient’s functional status is poor and expected survival is short. In the past 15 years there has been significant advances in the medical management of this problem, so that virtually all patients can avoid dying with the traditional approach of intravenous fluids and nasogastric tubes ('drip and suck”). The cornerstone of treatment is drug therapy. Major Drugs Opioids and anti-emetics (usually dopamine antagonists, e.g. haloperidol) can be administered (intravenously or subcutaneously) to relieve pain and nausea. Antimuscarinic/anticholinergic drugs (e.g. atropine, scopolamine) are used to manage colicky pain due to smooth muscle spasm and bowel wall distension. In the US, scopolamine can be administered by parenteral (10 mg/hr IV/SQ continuous infusion) or transdermally (10 mcg/hr). Scopolamine is only available in the US as the hydrobromide salt; this penetrates the CNS, with the attendant potential for significant side effects such as delirium. An alternative agent is glycopyrrolate, a quaternary ammonium antimuscarinic with similar clinical effects to scopolamine, but without the CNS side-effects (dosed at 0.2-0.4 mg IV/SQ q2-4h). A recent advance is to use somatostatin analogs, which lack the adverse effects of antimuscarinic agents. Somatostatin inhibits secretion of GH, TSH, ACTH and prolactin, and decreases the release of gastrin, CCK, insulin, glucagon, gastric acid and pancreatic enzymes. It also inhibits neurotransmission in peripheral nerves of the gastrointestional tract leading to decreased peristalsis and a decrease in splanchnic blood flow. Octreotide (Sandostatin) is administered as a SQ injection (starting at 50-100 mcg q 8 hours) or as continuous IV or SQ infusion, beginning at 10-20 mcg/hr. The drug is titrated every 24 hours until nausea, vomiting, and abdominal pain are controlled. A once monthly injection of a long-acting formulation can be used for patients controlled on a stable dose. Minor Drugs Prokinetic drugs (e.g. metoclopramide) may be beneficial if there is a partial obstruction. However, if there is total obstruction some advocate the discontinuation of prokinetic agents as they may exacerbate crampy abdominal pain. On the other hand metoclopramide may inhibit the reverse peristalsis from obstruction and decrease nausea. Corticosteroids have been recommended to decrease the inflammatory response and resultant edema, as well as relieve nausea, through both central and peripheral antiemetic effects. Care Plan The goal of medical management is to decrease pain, nausea and secretions into the bowel in order eliminate the need for a nasogastric tube and IV hydration. During the medication titration phase, IV fluids should be restricted to 50 ml/hr. When NG output is less than 100cc/day, the NG tube can be clamped for 12 hours and then removed. Once out, patients are instructed that they may drink and even eat, although vomiting may occur. If a venting gastrostomy tube is already in place, oral intake can be normal without fear of vomiting. Supplemental parenteral hydration is only indicated if a) patients remain dehydrated despite oral intake, and b) use of hydration to extend life is consistent with the patients’ goals. (see Fast Facts #133 , 134 ). References Jatoi A, Podratz KC, Gill P, Hartmann LC. Pathophysiology and palliation of inoperable bowel obstruction in patients with ovarian cancer. J Support Oncol. 2004; 2(4):323-34. PMID: 15357517. Adler DG. Management of malignant colonic obstruction. Curr Treat Options Gastroenterol. 2005; 8(3):231-237. PMID: 15913512. Ripamonti C, Mercadante S. How to use octreotide for malignant bowel obstruction. J Support Oncol. 2004; 2(4):357-64. PMID: 15357519. ACGME Competencies: Medical Knowledge, Patient Care Keyword(s): Communication, Pain – Evaluation, Pain – Opioids 
#046 Malignant Wounds, 2nd ed Author(s): Frank Ferris MD and Charles F von Gunten MD Introduction Few things can worsen a patient’s quality of life greater than an oozing, odorous, painful, and bleeding malignant skin wound. The pathology of a primary or metastatic cancer to the skin leading to an open wound is a combination of neovascularization, necrosis and inflammation, leading to pain, bleeding, odor and exudate. As with other chronic wounds, a fundamental decision needs to be made about whether the wound can eventually heal or not. The choice of dressing is generally the same as with pressure ulcers (see Fast Fact #41 ). However, malignant wound management raises additional issues that deserve comment. Note: for any complex wound, it is recommended that you seek professional consultation from a wound care expert. Exudates Exudates can be substantial from malignant wounds. The overall goal is to prevent exudate macerating other normal tissues or dripping off the patient into clothes and bedclothes. This serves both infection control as well as cosmetic goals. One can use absorbent foams to minimize the frequency of dressing changes and maximize absorption. Typically a gauze pad (such as an ‘ABD’ pad) is placed on top of the foam. Alginate dressings have a role in wounds that have exudates and/or are bleeding. They are absorptive, hemostatic, and help to control infection. They do not have to be pulled off and can be simply washed off in the shower. Infection Malignant wounds carry a high risk of superficial infection, especially with anaerobic or fungal species. Odor is frequently the first sign of anaerobic infection along with a purulent exudate. If the infection is only superficial, topical treatment (metronidazole, silver sulfadiazine) may be sufficient. However, if there is evidence of deeper tissue infection, then systemic metronidazole should be used. If the wound is determined to be non-healing, then topical agents like povidone can be used; some patients find it irritating and painful, however. Povidone is cytotoxic to bacteria and will help keep the wound clean. Povidone should not be used for wounds that are expected to heal because it is cytotoxic to normal granulation tissue. Odor Managing odor can be accomplished by using odor absorbers; kitty litter or activated charcoal can be placed on a cookie tray underneath the bed. In addition, there are charcoal dressings that can be used to cover a particularly malodorous wound. Additional approaches include putting a burning flame (such as a candle) in the room in an attempt to combust the chemicals causing the odor. One can also introduce a competing odor; bowls of vinegar, vanilla, or coffee. Fragrances and perfumes are often poorly tolerated by patients and should be avoided. Bleeding Bleeding is common; the surface of a malignancy may be friable and predispose to bleeding. It may either present as oozing (microvascular fragmentation) or vascular disruption from necrosis or sloughing leading to “a bleeder.” Any dressing that comes into contact with the surface may adhere and tear the surface when it is pulled off (e.g. saline wet-dry dressings). This can be prevented by using a mesh synthetic polymer, non-stick, non absorptive dressing (e.g. Mepitel). Other options to control bleeding are alginate dressings, topical low dose (100 U/ml) thromboplastin, silver nitrate, or cautery. In addition to systemic treatments for pain (e.g. oral or parenteral opioids), local anesthetics can also be helpful. Reference Barton P, Parslow N. Malignant wounds: holistic assessment and management. In: Krasner DL, Rodeheaver GT, Sibbald RG, eds. Chronic Wound Care: A Clinical Source Book for Healthcare Professionals. Third Edition. Wayne, PA: HMP Communications; 2001: pp699-710. ACGME Competencies: Medical Knowledge, Patient Care Keyword(s): Non-Pain Symptoms and Syndromes 
#047 What Do I Tell The Children, 2nd ed Author(s): Paula Rauch and Robert Arnold MD Background The death of a young adult is always difficult, even more so when there are young children survivors. A common question asked by dying adults or their family members is What do I tell the children? Physicians and other health care providers can provide leadership and guidance to help young families through this crisis. Screening and awareness Ask if the ill person has children at home. Ask about their age, personality, and coping style. Ask what the ill person has told the children about the illness. Ask if they have a specific worry about the child. Ask if the child has had recent problems in school, at home or with relationships. Ask who they would like to talk to if they have concerns? Give them some words Often a parent’s biggest worry is what to say if the child asks if he or she is dying. Here are two examples of words a parent might use. Asking a parent if these words would feel comfortable to say can begin a dialogue between patient and clinician to arrive at language that is honest, and life affirming. “X” can kill people, but I am taking the best care of myself I can. I am following the doctor’s plan so that I can live as long as possible. Even with trying my hardest and getting the best possible care, my ____ is getting worse; still I plan to live every day. Give adults concrete examples to guide their interactions Express interest in the child’s day. Work to maintain normal routines (e.g. maintain family rituals: Friday night supper, Monday night pizza, watching television together). Welcome all questions but do not force discussions. Make sure you understand the real question before answering. Take your time to think about how you want to answer. Overhearing bad news is the worst way to hear it. Talk with children from diagnosis onward, being sure to give updates when there are changes in prognosis or treatment. Avoid euphemisms (e.g. lump, boo-boo, or sickness) that may confuse children. Ask children to share what they are thinking, or hear from others, so they do not worry alone. Prepare children for visits with the sick person. Describe what they are likely to see. Bring along another adult who is comfortable to stay only as long as the child wants. Bring along markers and paper, so children can leave the parent with a picture or message. Talk to the child's teacher or guidance counselor to alert the teachers. Ask teachers and the child's friends' parents to let the parent know if the child talks about worries. Refer adults to one of the popular books on the subject (Kroen, McCue) Know the resources for parents and children in your hospital and community Consider referral to a child life specialist or mental health professional when any of the following occur: Symptoms of depression or anxiety that interfere with school, home or with peers Risk taking behavior Significant discord between the child and the surviving parent Significant discord between the parents The child says he or she wants to talk to someone outside of the family. References: Rauch P. Comment: Supporting the Child Within the Family. J Clin Ethics. 2000; 11:169-170. Harpham,W. When a Parent Has Cancer. A Guide to Caring for Your Children. San Francisco, CA: HarperCollins; 1997. Keeley D. Telling Children About a Parent's Cancer. BMJ. 2000; 321:462-463. Krementz J. How It Feels When a Parent Dies. New York, NY: Alfred Knopf; 1988. Kroen WC. Helping Children Cope with the Loss of a Loved One. Minneapolis, MN: Free Spirit Publishing; 1996. McCue K. How to Help Children Through a Parent's Serious Illness. New York, NY: St. Martins Griffin; 1994. Rauch PK, Muriel AC. Raising an Emotionally Healthy Child When a Parent is Sick. New York, NY: McGraw-Hill; 2005. ACGME Competencies: Interpersonal and Communication Skills, Patient Care Keyword(s): Communication, Psychosocial and Spiritual Experience: Patients, Families, and Clinicians 
#048 Coding and Billing for Physician Services in Palliative Care, 2nd ed Author(s): Charles F von Gunten MD, PhD Introduction Many primary care and specialist physicians (e.g. oncologists) are now becoming part or full-time palliative care “consultants”. Issues of coding and reimbursement are no different for palliative care than for any other medical specialty. That is, physicians code for each patient encounter in two parts: 1) a procedure/service code, and 2) a diagnosis code. Procedure/Service Codes are published in the Current Procedural Terminology book published by the American Medical Association. This is used universally in US health care; the Evaluation/Management (E/M) codes are used most frequently. A code is chosen based on location, complexity and effort. Time can be used as a measure of complexity and effort when counseling and information-giving comprise more than 50% of the encounter. For inpatient visits, time is defined as the total time on the unit related to the patient, including reviewing the chart, interviewing and examining the patient/family, reviewing studies, calling resources, and documenting the encounter. For out-of-the hospital patient encounters (e.g. clinic, home visit) time is defined as the face-to-face time with the patient. Diagnosis codes are chosen from the International Classification of Diseases (ICD). The list is broader than pathophysiological entities—there are many symptom codes (e.g. fatigue 780.79 or vomiting 787.03). Those who do billing for physicians often make a list of frequently used codes for easy reference rather than looking them up each time. Concurrent care and billing is permitted as long as there is a legitimate need, and the concurrent physician provides a service different from the other physician seeing the patient on the same day. Coding can describe the differences by using a different diagnosis code from other physicians. For example, if you provide a consultation for a patient with CHF and dyspnea. The primary physician will likely use the code for CHF; the palliative care physician can use the code for dyspnea (786.09). Documentation must support the coding and billing. If time is used, explicitly indicate the total time spent and what was done: e.g. “I spent a total of 90 minutes; 60 minutes were comprised of counseling and information giving around the diagnosis and prognosis with the patient and her husband. In summary, we agreed that…” Make any recommendations or conclusions clearly legible and easy to find in the note. Explicitly describe the issues and prognosis. Describe the physical, psychological, social, and spiritual dimensions that make this case so complex as to require your expert assistance. For example “I have rarely seen such a challenging case of refractory pain, nausea and vomiting complicated by difficult family dimensions and existential distress. Specifically….” Do not hedge about prognosis. “There is evidence of multiple organ failure. In my best judgment, this patient will die in 24-48 hours and continues to require skilled RN and daily MD assessment because of the rapid changes.” If the patient has elected the Medicare Hospice Benefit , the primary attending (if not associated with the hospice organization, i.e. as a hospice medical director) submits bills to Medicare under Part B. All other physicians (e.g. consultants) submit their bills to the hospice organization, who then submit the claims to Part A. These physicians are reimbursed directly from the hospice agency. Reference von Gunten CF, Ferris FD, Kirschner C, Emanuel L. Coding and reimbursement mechanisms for physician services in hospice and palliative care. J Palliat Med. 2000; 3(2):157-164. ACGME Competencies: System-based Practice Keyword(s): Ethics, Law, Policy Health Systems 
#049 Gabapentin for Neuropathic Pain, 2nd ed Author(s): Anita Kishore, Linda King MD, and David E Weissman MD Introduction Gabapentin (Neurontin) is widely used for neuropathic pain. Controlled clinical trials in diabetic neuropathy and postherpetic neuralgia show that gabapentin at 2400-3600 mg/day has an efficacy similar to tricyclic antidepressants and carbamazepine. Consistent, though less compelling clinical evidence supports its use for cancer pain, pain associated with HIV infection, chronic back pain and others (readers wanting more in depth research findings are urged to consult Reference 1). The exact mechanism and site of action of gabapentin is unknown. Gabapentin is generally well-tolerated, easily titrated, has few drug interactions, and does not require laboratory monitoring. However, cost may be a limiting factor for some patients. Patients suitable for gabapentin should have a clear neuropathic pain syndrome, characterized by sharp, shooting, lancinating and/or burning pain, in a nerve root (radicular) or stocking/glove distribution. Adult Dosing Gabapentin is started at low doses (100 mg to 300 mg total daily) and increased by 100 – 300 mg every 1-3 days to effect. A typical schedule might be: day 1-2: 300 mg nightly; day 3-4: 300 mg twice daily; day 5-7: 600 mg twice daily; day 8 onwards: 600 mg three times a day. The usual effective total daily dose is 900-3600 mg, administered in three divided doses per day. Higher doses may be needed. Titration should proceed more slowly in elderly patients. Dosing in Renal Failure Gabapentin doses must be reduced for patients with renal insufficiency. Creatinine Clearance (CrCl) 30-60 ml/min: maximum daily dose is 1400 mg, divided. CrCl 16-30 ml/min: maximum daily dose is 700 mg, given once daily. CrCl 15ml/min: maximum daily dose is 300 mg, once daily. Doses should decrease proportionally for CrCl less than 15 ml/min (e.g. 300 mg every other day for a CrCl of ~7.5 ml/min). For patients on hemodialysis a supplemental dose is usually given after dialysis (usually 100-300 mg). Adverse Reactions Sedation, confusion, dizziness, and ataxia are the most common side effects, especially with rapid dose titration. Tolerance to these effects appears to develop within a few days if the dose is held at the highest tolerated dose until symptoms improve or stabilize. Dosage Formulations Gabapentin is available in 100 mg, 300 mg, and 400 mg capsules, 600 mg and 800 mg tablets, and as a liquid (250mg/5mL). Cost Gabapentin is more expensive than older agents used for neuropathic pain (tricyclic antidepressants and older anti-epileptic drugs such as carbamazepine). Generic gabapentin is available, although can cost ~$100 for 90 600 mg tablets. Summary Gabapentin is a safe and effective adjuvant analgesic for neuropathic pain. Physicians should become comfortable using and titrating gabapentin in patients with neuropathic pain syndromes. References Wiffen PJ, Collins S, McQuay HJ, Carroll D, Jadad A, Moore RA. Anticonvulsant drugs for acute and chronic pain. Cochrane Database of Systematic Reviews. 2005, Issue 2. Art. No.: CD001133. DOI: 10.1002/14651858.CD001133.pub2. Available at: http://www.cochrane.org/reviews/en/ab001133.html . Adapted from: Module 4: Pain Management. In: Emanuel LL, von Gunten CF, Ferris FF. The EPEC Curriculum: Education for Physicians on End-of-life Care. Chicago, IL: The EPEC Project, 1999. http://www.epec.net. Caraceni A, et al. Gabapentin for neuropathic cancer pain: a randomized controlled trial from the gabapentin cancer pain study group. J Clin Onc. 2004; 22:2909-2917. Micromedex Drug Database. Thompson Reuters. http://www.micromedex.com . ACGME Competencies: Medical Knowledge Keyword(s): Pain – Non-Opioids 
#050 Disaster: Coping with Tragedy, 2nd ed Author(s): Bruce Ambuel PhD Editor’s Note, April 2009: The original version of this Fast Fact was released in 2001 after the September 11th attacks. It was revised and re-released as a 2nd edition in 2005 after Hurricane Katrina. While specific to a certain time and place, these reflections on living, working, and caring for patients in the immediate aftermath of horrific events are timeless. Even though they are similar in many aspects, I have combined both editions of Fast Fact #50 into a single document for the EPERC website, so readers will be able to see each iteration. Inevitably, these words will be timely all too soon. September 11, 2001 This is a very difficult time for each of us individually, for our community and for our country. The terrorist attacks of September 11 are a profound tragedy. Each of us is, no doubt, experiencing many different feelings – sadness, anxiety, anger, helplessness, a sense of unreality, insecurity, profound grief. Strong feelings are normal. Whatever you are feeling is OK. Many of us may also have some difficulty concentrating throughout the day. We may find ourselves suddenly tearful at unexpected moments. We may have difficulty sleeping at night. These are normal reactions to a major loss. Be gentle and accepting with your self, and understand that these feelings and experiences are your way of coping. Our strong feelings and reactions to this tragedy may last for an extended period of time. This is normal following a major disaster. At this point in time we don't have important information. Who has been injured and who has died? How did these tragedies come about? Who is responsible for planning them and carrying them out? As we learn more about what has happened, what we have lost, and who is responsible, we will continue to experience a range of emotions. The magnitude of this tragedy will be imprinted in out hearts and minds. Be aware that some members of our community will suffer a very personal loss-the injury or death of a friend, colleague or family member. Some may already know about such a personal loss, while others may learn of the injury or death of family, friends or colleagues in the coming hours or days. If you know someone who has suffered such a loss, offer them your support and love. If you have suffered such a personal loss yourself please reach out to friends and colleagues. The importance of doing our job At a time like this it is important to remind our selves that each patient who walks in our clinic door is seeking our help as they cope with their own illness, injury or concern. What we can offer to each of our patients is a healing relationship. The first step in creating this healing relationship is giving our complete attention to the individual patient. In spite of the turmoil in the world around us, our job remains tending to the healing of the individual, serving witness to the individual's suffering, treating the individual's disease or injury, sustaining the individual's health. In the coming days we will need to work to maintain each patient's concerns as our top priority, and resist the temptation to be distracted from this mission by the swirl of events around us. As we face this challenge, let us rededicate ourselves to providing a compassionate, friendly and supportive environment to each patient. What can you do: It is natural to feel helpless at a time like this. Here are some steps you can take to help yourself and others. Talk with friends, family and coworkers about what you are feeling and thinking. Listen to and read the news. Obtain accurate information, as it becomes available. At the same time allow yourself to break away from the intense news coverage for periods of time. Each of us needs accurate information, but we also need time away from the media coverage to think and digest what we have seen and heard. Seek professional help for yourself or others if you are concerned that your emotions and thoughts are out of control, leading to depression or anxiety that inactivates you. Contact your Employee Assistance Program, your primary care physician, or a local mental health clinic. Guard against prejudice and racism. Early speculation has focused upon a link between the attack and terrorists that are political extremists and fundamentalist Muslim. Our Islamic patients and our Islamic community in the United States will feel especially vulnerable at this time. Islam is not a violent religion and does not promote terrorism. Extremists carried out these acts of terror. Speak out if you hear prejudice or racism. Caution others to avoid inappropriate generalizations about any religious, racial or ethnic group. Make sure that your own inevitable anger serves the cause of justice and fairness, not prejudice and blind revenge. Think about what has ultimate importance and meaning in your life. If you are religious or spiritual, seek out the comfort and perspective that can come from spiritual literature, prayer, meditation, and your religious community. Reflect on fundamental principles of our democracy. This attack is an assault against our civil government and other democracies throughout the world. What is it we value in our system of government? What principles and ideals do we want to nurture and strengthen through this crisis? The U.S. Department of Health and Human Services has activated the National Disaster Medical System. Health care professionals may contact their local hospital to find out how they might participate. Parents can find advice for children at the National Association of School Psychologists web site: http://www.nasponline.org Donate blood at your local blood center. Contact the American Red Cross to donate money and ask about the need for clothing, food, etc. The Red Cross takes a central leadership role in disaster relief efforts. Hurricane Katrina, August 2005 The impact of Hurricane Katrina reaches far beyond the gulf shores of Louisiana, Alabama and Mississippi. As people in Katrina’s path struggle to survive and recover, and volunteers and aide workers rush to respond, we are aware that the entire country is profoundly touched by the tragedy that has befallen our southern neighbors. At a time like this it is natural to experience many different feelings— sadness, anxiety, anger, fear, helplessness, a sense of unreality, insecurity, grief. Strong feelings are normal in the face of human suffering—respect whatever feelings you are having. Some of us may have difficulty concentrating during the day. We may find ourselves lost in thought about the disaster or suddenly tearful at an unexpected moment. Some may have difficulty sleeping at night. These are normal reactions to a major loss. Be gentle and accepting with your self, and understand that these feelings and experiences are a part your way of coping. Be aware that some members of your community will suffer a very personal loss—a friend, colleague or family member who has experienced the wholesale destruction of a home or livelihood, injury, death. Some may already know about such a personal loss, while others may learn of the injury or death of family, friends or colleagues in the coming hours or days. If you know someone who has suffered such a loss, offer them your support and love. If you have suffered such a personal loss yourself please reach out to friends and colleagues. Our feelings, thoughts and reactions to this tragedy may last for an extended period of time. This is normal following a major disaster. At this point in time we do not have important information. Who has been injured, who is missing and who has died? How extensive is the damage to cities and towns in the hurricane’s path? What is the true extent of the environmental damage? What else could happen that might magnify the tragedy? As we learn more about what has happened and what we have lost, we will continue to experience a range of thoughts and feelings. The magnitude of this tragedy will be imprinted in out hearts and minds. The importance of doing our job At a time like this it is important to remind our selves that each patient who walks in our clinic door is seeking our help as they cope with their own illness, injury or concern. What we can offer to each of our patients is a healing relationship. The first step in creating this healing relationship is giving our complete attention to the individual patient. In spite of the turmoil in the world around us, our job remains tending to the healing of the individual, serving witness to the individual’s suffering, treating the individual’s disease or injury, sustaining the individual’s health. In the coming days we will need to work to maintain each patient’s concerns as our top priority, and resist the temptation to be distracted from this mission by the swirl of events around us. As we face this challenge, let us rededicate ourselves to providing a compassionate, friendly and supportive environment to each patient. What can you do: Here are some steps you can take to help yourself and others cope. Talk with friends, family and coworkers about what you are feeling and thinking. Listen to and read the news. Obtain accurate information, as it becomes available. At the same time allow yourself to break away from the intense news coverage. Each of us needs accurate information, but we also need time away from the media coverage to think and digest what we have seen and heard. Some people will prefer to limit or avoid television news coverage because the video images are too intense and upsetting. Children, depending upon their developmental stage and individual temperament, may not have the intellectual and emotional tools to understand the vivid and intense coverage on TV and cable news. Parents should monitor and limit children’s television as appropriate. Seek professional help if you become concerned that your emotions and thoughts leading to depression or anxiety that inactivates you or makes you ineffective at work or home. Contact your Employee Assistance Program, your primary care physician, or a local mental health clinic. Seeking help early is more effective than trying to be tough. People who begin developing problems with anxiety after a traumatic event recover more rapidly when they seek help immediately. Think about what has ultimate importance and meaning in your life—people, relationships, spiritual beliefs. If you are religious or spiritual, seek out the comfort and perspective that can come from spiritual literature, prayer, meditation, and your religious community. Parents and teachers can find advice for children at the National Association of School Psychologists web site: http://www.nasponline.org The American Psychological Association, http://www.apa.org/ , has excellent resources on coping with disaster. The U.S. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention have good resources on hurricane recovery: http://www.bt.cdc.gov/disasters/hurricanes Donate blood at your local blood center. Contact the American Red Cross, http://www.redcross.org , to donate money and ask about the need for clothing, food, etc. The Red Cross takes a central leadership role in disaster relief efforts. Keyword(s): Psychosocial and Spiritual Experience: Patients, Families, and Clinicians 
#051 Choosing an Oral Opioid Combination Product, 2nd ed Author(s): David E Weissman MD Introduction There are over 50 different opioid combination products, available in a range of tablet strengths and liquids. Opioid combination products are typically used for moderate pain that is episodic (e.g. breakthrough pain) on a PRN basis. These products contain either acetaminophen, aspirin or ibuprofen, with an opioid: codeine (e.g. Tylenol #2-4), hydrocodone (e.g. Lorcet, Lortab, Vicodin, Vicoprofen), oxycodone (e.g. Percocet, Percodan, Tylox, Roxicet) or propoxyphene (e.g. Darvocet, Wygesic). Other formulations also may contain caffeine and/or a barbiturate. This Fast Fact will review information for rationally choosing among the various products. Intrinsic Analgesic Potency Milligram for milligram, oxycodone and hydrocodone are the most potent opioids in this group; they are roughly equianalgesic to each other. Codeine is less potent and propoxyphene the least potent of the group; propoxyphene products are probably no more potent than aspirin or acetaminophen alone. Toxicity The dose limiting property of all the combination products is the aspirin, acetaminophen or ibuprofen, not the opioid (see below). Patients receiving any of the four opioids may experience classic opioid side effects: nausea, constipation, pruritus or sedation, along with the potential for tolerance and physical dependence with chronic use. Differences in side effect severity among the different opioids is largely idiosyncratic. There is anecdotal experience that codeine is the most, and hydrocodone the least, emetogenic among the four opioids. Propoxyphene’s major metabolite is a CNS stimulant, increasing the likelihood of seizures in an overdose situation. It is also cardiotoxic, with lidocaine-like effects. Because of limited efficacy and increased toxicity, propoxyphene is not recommend, especially in the elderly (1). Multiple countries have banned propoxyphene; as of 2009 this is under consideration in the US. Cost Generic products are readily available and typically less expensive. Range of available doses Codeine products: 15-60 mg codeine/tablet Oxycodone or hydrocodone: 2.5–10 mg opioid/tablet Propoxyphene: 50-100 mg propoxyphene/tablet Acetaminophen doses range from 325–750 mg/tablet Recommendations for use Propoxyphene should rarely, if ever, be prescribed; it should not be used in the elderly. Prescribe generic products whenever possible. Prescribe only one combination product at any given time. Avoid writing orders that include multiple products (e.g. “X” for mild pain, “Y” for moderate pain, etc). Rather, prescribe only one product, assess efficacy and toxicity, and modify accordingly. Prescribe codeine, oxycodone and hydrocodone products at a q4h interval; not q 4-6 or q6h (see Fast Fact #18 ) ( #2 ). Pay very close attention to the total daily dose of acetaminophen/aspirin/ibuprofen. Note: the dose of acetaminophen per tablet can range from 325-750 mg. Thus, with a recommended limit of < 4 grams per day, this equals 12 tablets @ 325 mg or 5 tablets @ 750 mg tablet. Patients with renal or liver dysfunction are at higher risk for adverse effects from the non-opioid (3). References AGS Panel on Chronic Pain in Older Persons. The Management of chronic pain in older persons. J Am Geriatric Soc. 1998; 46:635-651. Jacox A, Carr DB, Payne R, et al. Management of Cancer Pain. Clinical Practice Guideline No. 9. AHCPR Publication No. 94-0592. Agency for Health Care Policy and Research, U.S. Department of Health and Human Services, Public Health Service, 1994. Available at: http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/books/bv.fcgi?rid=hstat6.chapter.18803 . MB Max, R Payne, WT Edwards, et al. Principles of analgesic use in the treatment of acute pain and cancer pain. 4th Edition. Glenview, IL: American Pain Society; 1999. Zwillich T. FDA Panel Urges Ban of Pain Drug [news story]. WebMD. Jan 30 2009. Available at: http://www.webmd.com/pain-management/news/20090130/fda-panel-urges-ban-of-a-pain-drug . ACGME Competencies: Medical Knowledge, Patient Care Keyword(s): Pain – Opioids 
#052 Quality of Life Author(s): Victor T Chang MD and David E Weissman MD Introduction ’Quality of life’ is a term commonly used by health professionals when trying to help patients and families make decisions concerning care near the end of life. Formal studies using quality of life instruments are increasingly common in clinical trials, typically used as an outcome measurement before and after treatment. Implicit is the notion that if quantity of the time left cannot be increased, then quality of life should be maximized. But what does ’quality of life’ (QOL) mean, and how should clinicians use this information in decision making? Aspects of QOL There are two key concepts about QOL: it is multi-dimensional and most appropriately determined by the patient. Although family members, physicians and other health professionals can make significant observations about QOL, studies consistently document important variances between patient and surrogate defined QOL. A quality of life assessment can be considered a review of systems of the patient’s world. The multi-dimensional aspects of QOL can be assessed by asking questions in the following key domains: physical, functional, emotional, social, and spiritual/existential. The sum of these questions can be a “snapshot” of the patient’s world and give the clinician an idea of what is important to a patient, what limits them, and what goals of care may be meaningful. Medical interventions usually affect physical and functional well-being. Measures of QOL Instruments specifically designed for palliative care patients, such as the Missoula VITAS-QOL and the QUAL-E, have helped to provide new insights into what QOL means for patients nearing the end-of-life. While QOL instruments (questionnaires) have been developed for many conditions, a few basic open ended questions can be helpful in talking to patients: How has your disease interfered with your daily activities? (Functional domain) Have are you getting along with family and friends as a result of your illness? (Social) Have you been feeling worried or sad about your illness? (Emotional) Have you been feeling sick or bedridden because of your illness? (Physical) How much or which symptoms bother you the most? (Physical) How have your religious beliefs been affected by your illness? (Spiritual/existential) Do you find yourself wondering what is the meaning of all this? (Spiritual/existential) Final words Patients almost always appreciate having the chance to discuss these issues with their doctor. For one thing, asking these questions tells patients that the physician has an interest in their well being that goes beyond the actual disease. Physicians who have a better understanding of the totality of the disease experience for the patient (which is another way of reframing the meaning of QOL), will be better prepared to care for patients near the end-of-life. References Brunelli C, Constantini M, DiGiulio P, et al. Quality of life evaluation: when do terminal cancer patients and health-care providers agree? J Pain Sym Manage. 1998; 15:151-158. Byock IR, Merriman MP. Measuring quality of life for patients with terminal illness: the Missoula VITAS quality of life index. Palliative Med. 1998; 12:231-44. Detmar SB, Muller MJ, Wever LD, et al. The patient-physician relationship. Patient-physician communication during outpatient palliative treatment visits: an observational study. JAMA. 2002; 285:1351-7. Steele LL, Mills B, Hardin SR, Hussey LC. The quality of life of hospice patients: patient and provider perceptions. Am J Hosp Palliative Care. 2005; 22:95-110. Steinhauser KE, Clipp EC, Bosworth HB et al. Measuring quality of life at the end of life: validation of the QUAL-E. Palliative Supportive Care. 2004; 2:3-14. ACGME Competencies: Medical Knowledge, Patient Care Keyword(s): Psychosocial and Spiritual Experience: Patients, Families, and Clinicians 
#053 Sublingual Morphine, 2nd ed Author(s): Debra Gordon RN, MS, FAAN Background The preferred route of administration of analgesics for most patients in pain is oral (PO). Soluble tablets of morphine are available for sublingual (SL) administration in patients who are unable to swallow oral analgesics. The advantage of using SL morphine over intermittent IV boluses is a longer duration of action. An IV bolus may last only 1-2 hours, whereas SL morphine may provide relief for up to 4 hours. Pharmacology Sublingual administration of morphine is often used to treat breakthrough pain in an attempt to hasten analgesic onset and peak; however, available data do not support more rapid absorption of morphine through the sublingual mucosa when compared with the oral route (1-3). Indeed, a number of clinical studies have found no substantial advantage to the use of SL morphine over oral morphine (4-6). Mean time to maximum concentration has been shown to be shorter following PO morphine (0.8 + 0.35hr) compared with SL (1.75 + 1.30 hr), indicating that SL morphine is likely swallowed and absorbed gastrointestinally rather than through the oral mucosa (3). The bioavailability (amount of drug eventually made available to the systemic circulation) of SL morphine is only 9% compared with 23.8% after an oral solution (however, the PO and SL doses should be considered equianalgesic when calculating doses). Agents are most readily absorbed through the oral mucosa when they are potent, non-ionized at physiological pH, and lipid soluble (see Fast Fact #103 ). Morphine has a relatively low potency for an opioid, is 90% ionized at the pH of the mouth, and is one of the least lipid soluble opioids with a partition coefficient of 0.00001, providing an explanation for its low bioavailability and poor choice as a SL or buccal medication. Formulation and Dosing There are several forms of short acting PO morphine available on the market. However, only the soluble tablets or the concentrated oral solution are suitable for SL use. Nonsoluble morphine sulfate immediate release (MSIR) tablets will not work because they are not soluble and will not liquefy under the tongue. A usual starting dose for an opioid naïve patient is 5-30mg PO or SL every 3-4 hours. PO and SL doses are considered equianalgesic. The equianalgesic ratio of IV to PO morphine is 1:3 (10mg of IV morphine is approximately equianalgesic to 30mg PO/SL morphine). This Fast Fact was adapted with permission from the University of Wisconsin Hospital & Clinics, Madison, WI Pain Patient Care Team ‘Pain Management Fast Facts – 5 Minute Inservice’ series. References: Osborne R, Joel S, Trew D, Slevin M. Morphine and metabolite behavior after different routes of morphine administration: demonstration of the importance of the active metabolite morphine-6-glucourinide. Clinical Pharmacology Therapy. 1990; 47:12-19. David T, Miser AW, Loprinzi CL, Kaur JS, Burnham NL, Dose AM, Ames MM. Comparative morphine pharmacokinetics following sublingual, intramuscular, and oral administration in patients with cancer. The Hospice Journal. 1993; 9(1):85-90. Colluzzi PH. Sublingual morphine: efficacy reviewed. J Pain Sympt Manage. 1998; 16(3):184-192. Pannuti F, Rossi AP, Lafelice G, et al. Control of chronic pain in very advanced cancer patients with morphine hydrochloride administered by oral, rectal, and sublingual routes: clinical report and preliminary results on morphine pharmacokinetics. Pharmacological Research Communications. 1982; 14(4):369-380. McQuay HJ, Moore RA, Bullingham RE. Sublinqual morphine, heroin, methadone, and buprenorphine: kinetics and effects. In: Foley KM & Inturrisi CE, eds. Advances in Pain Research and Therapy, Vol 8. New York, NY: Raven; 1986: pp 407-412. Robinson JM, Wilkie DJ, et al. Sublingual and oral morphine administration. Review and new findings. Nursing Clin N America. 1995; 30(4):725-743. ACGME Competencies: Medical Knowledge, Patient Care Keyword(s): Pain – Opioids 
#054 Opioid Infusions in the Imminently Dying Patient, 2nd ed Author(s): Elizabeth Weinstein, Robert Arnold MD, and David E Weissman MD Introduction Opioid infusions, either intravenous (IV) or subcutaneous (SQ – see Fast Fact #28 ), can provide smooth and efficient control of distressing pain or dyspnea in the imminently dying patient. Opioids correctly titrated to provide symptom relief will not cause respiratory depression (see Fast Fact #8 ). It is common for physicians to order an opioid infusion in the dying patient as follows: Start morphine infusion at 1 mg/hr, titrate to effect. This type of order is pharmacologically unsound and unsafe; hospitals should adopt clinical practice guidelines that meet current national standards. The following is a step by step approach to rational opioid infusion prescribing in the dying patient, and is most appropriate for morphine or hydromorphone infusions; a future Fast Fact will discuss the use of methadone. First, before starting an opioid infusion, calculate an equianalgesic dose of currently used opioids; then convert this to an equianalgesic basal rate. Example: a patient on oral extended release morphine 60 mg q12, now unable to swallow. 60 mg q 12 = 120 mg/24 hours PO morphine = 40 mg IV morphine/24 hours = approximately 2 mg/hr IV infusion basal rate). Second, if the current opioid dose is not effective, dose escalate the basal dose by 25-100% (see Fast Fact #20 ). Third, if the patient is opioid naïve or when increasing the basal rate above the current equianalgesic rate, give a loading dose when starting the infusion. Example: for a 1 mg/hr basal rate, give 2-5 mg loading dose (see reference 4 for additional dosing guidelines). Fourth, choose a bolus dose (i.e. ‘rescue’ or ‘PCA’ dose if a patient controlled analgesia system is being used). This can be a nurse initiated bolus dose when using a standard IV infuser, or a patient, nurse or family initiative bolus using a PCA device. Even though the dying patient may be unable to press the button, the nurse or family members can use the PCA device, depending on local hospital policy. Based on patterns of breakthrough pain, a bolus dose of 50% - 150% of the hourly rate is a place to start. For example, for a morphine infusion of 2 mg/hr, choose a starting bolus dose of 1-3 mg. Fifth, choose a dosing interval. The peak analgesic effect from an IV bolus dose is 5-10 minutes. Thus, the dosing interval (i.e. ‘lockout interval’ for a PCA device) should be in the range of 10-20 minutes. Sixth , reassess for desired effect vs. side effects every 10-15 minutes until stable. Adjust bolus dose size every 30-60 minutes until desired effect is achieved. The ‘right’ bolus dose is one which controls undesirable symptoms with acceptable toxicities. Seventh, reassess the need for a change in the basal rate no more frequently than every 6-8 hours. Use the number of administered bolus doses as a rough guide when calculating a new basal rate; never, however, increase the basal rate by more than 100% at any one time. When increasing the basal rate, always administer a loading dose so as to more rapidly achieve steady-state blood levels. Common sense caution The above guidelines should be thought of as a rough guide; differences in age, renal and pulmonary function and past responses to opioids must be considered when developing an appropriate analgesic treatment plan. When patients become anuric close to death, continuous dosing may be discontinued in favor of bolus dosing to prevent metabolite accumulation and agitated delirium. References Report of a WHO Expert Committee. Cancer pain relief and palliative care. World Health Organ Tech Rep Ser. 1990; 804:1-75. Levy M. Pharmacologic treatment of cancer pain. N Engl J Med. 1996; 335:1124-32. Management of cancer pain: adults. Clin Pract Guideline Quick Ref Guide Clin. 1994:1-29. Available at: http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/7509686?dopt=Abstract. Portenoy RK. Continuous Infusion of Opioid Drugs in the Treatment of Cancer: Guidelines for Use. J Pain Symptom Manage. 1986; 1:223-228. ACGME Competencies: Medical Knowledge, Patient Care Keyword(s): Pain – Opioids 
#055 Decision Making Capacity, 2nd ed Author(s): Robert Arnold MD Background Informed consent is based on the principle that patients should be allowed to make decisions for themselves. Decision making capacity thus serves as a gatekeeper concept. Patients who have it can make decisions for themselves; conversely, a surrogate is needed for patients who lack decision-making capacity. Competency is a legal term referring to a decision made by judge, although a physician’s opinion carries considerable weight in a competency hearing. In contrast, decision making capacity (‘decisionality’) refers to a physician’s determination, based on clinical examination, that a patient is able to make medical decisions for him- or herself. Most state Power of Attorney for Health Care documents require a physician (or similarly qualified individual such as a psychologist) to document that a patient has lost decision making capacity for the surrogate to become the legal agent for medical decisions. Assessing decision making capacity To be deemed ‘decisional,’ a physician must be satisfied that a patient is able to do three tasks: Receive information (e.g. must be awake, but not necessarily oriented x 4), Evaluate, deliberate, and mentally manipulate information, and Communicate a treatment preference (e.g. the comatose patient by definition is not decisional). Physicians should look for: Understanding. Does the patient adequately understand the information about the risks, benefits, and alternatives of what is being proposed? The patient does not have to agree with your interpretation, but should be able to repeat what you have said. Ask, Can you repeat to me the options for treating X I have just discussed with you? Can you explain to me why you feel that way? What is your understanding of what will happen if we don’t do Y? Logic. Is the logic the patient uses to arrive at the decision “not-irrational”? One wants, as much as possible to make sure the patient’s values are speaking, rather than an underlying mental or physical illness. Note: Severe depression or hopelessness will make it difficult to interpret decisionality; consult psychiatry for assistance with this or other complex cases. Consistency. Is the patient able to make a decision with some consistency? This means not changing one’s mind every time one is asked. Is the decision consistent with the patient’s values? If there is a change in the patient values, can the patient explain the change? Decision making capacity is contingent Task specific. Deciding if the patient is decisional means weighing the degree to which the patient has decision making capacity against the objective risks and benefits to the patient. Some decisions are more complex than others, requiring a higher level of decision-making capacity. Thus a moderately demented patient may be able to make some decisions (e.g. antibiotics for pneumonia) but not others (e.g. chemotherapy for metastatic lung cancer). This sliding scale view of decisionality holds that it is proper to require a higher level of certainty when the decision poses great harm. Time specific. When encephalopathic a patient may not be decisional; after treatment decisionality may be regained. References Drane JF. The Many Faces of Competency. Hasting Center Report. 1985; 15(2):17-21. Junkerman C, Schiedermayer D. Practical Ethics for Students, Interns and Residents. A Short Reference Manual. 2nd Edition. University Publishing Group; 1998. Jones RC, Holden T. A guide to assessing decision-making capacity. Cleve Clin J Med. 2004; 71:971-5. ACGME Competencies: Interpersonal and Communication Skills, Medical Knowledge, Patient Care Keyword(s): Ethics, Law, Policy Health Systems; Communication 
#056 What to do When a Patient Refuses Treatment, 2nd ed Author(s): Robert Arnold MD Background A core aspect of American bioethics is that a competent adult patient has a right to refuse treatment, even when the physician believes that the treatment would be beneficial. At such a time it is easy to either question the patient’s capacity to make the decision or try even harder to convince them to change their mind. The empirical literature – both in decision making and in medicine – suggest that this is a false dichotomy and that there is a third more productive way to proceed. The method described below is applicable to all situations of conflict between clinicians and their patients/families; the astute reader will note the similarity between this approach and that presented in Fast Fact #26, The Explanatory Model, designed to assist mediating conflicts that arise in cross-cultural encounters. Clarify Decisionality Distinguish between patients who cannot understand the medical situation (and thus may lack decision making capacity) and those who understand your viewpoint but do not agree with it. Ask, I have talked with you about the medical problems you are facing and possible treatments for these problems. Just to make sure we are on the same page, can you describe for me the medical problems you are dealing with now? Can you also describe the possible treatments we have discussed? (See Fast Fact #55 for more on decisionality.) Understand their story Try to understand the patient/family’s story before you try to change their mind. This means suspending your attitude toward their decision and as openly and non-judgmentally as possible, understanding the reasons for their decision. This can be done by asking, Tell me more about your decision – what leads you to this conclusion? Validate concerns Often when we try to convince others of our position, we forget to acknowledge the reality of their concerns. This makes them feel unheard and under appreciated. More effective are responses which first let the person know they were heard (So you are concerned that if you have surgery you will X) or that normalize their concerns (It is not that unusual for people to be afraid of XX) before you respond to these issues. Explore fears Fears are stronger motivators than positive inducements. Try to understand your patient/family’s fears/concerns with your plan of action; you can only address their fears if you understand them. Ask, Can you tell me if there is something about this decision that frightens you? Establish a win-win position If the patient’s concern is the lack of control in the hospital and your concern is her/his health if s/he leaves the hospital, what can you do to provide more control in the hospital? Negotiate so both of you can achieve what each of you care about the most. See the related Fast Facts #16 , 17 , 24 , 26 , 29 , 59 . References Drane JF. The Many Faces of Competency. Hasting Center Report. 1985; 15(2):17-21 Stone D, Patton B, et al. Difficult Conversations: How to Discuss What Matters Most. New York, NY: Penguin Group; 1999. Appelbaum PS, Roth LH. Patients who refuse treatment in medical hospitals. JAMA. 1983; 250:1296-1301. Jones RC, Holden T. A guide to assessing decision-making capacity. Cleve Clin J Med. 2004; 71:971-5. ACGME Competencies: Interpersonal and Communication Skills, Patient Care, Professionalism Keyword(s): Communication; Ethics, Law, Policy Health Systems 
#057 Neuroexcitatory Effects of Opioids: Patient Assessment, 2nd ed Author(s): Robin K Wilson PhD and David E Weissman MD Background Everyone recognizes the common opioid side effects: constipation, nausea, pruritis, and urinary retention. Less well appreciated are the neuroexcitatory effects, commonly seen among patients on chronic opioids. Among these, myoclonus is typically the herald symptom. This Fast Fact will discuss risk factors and patient assessment of the neuroexcitatory opioid side effects, particularly myoclonus; Fast Fact #58 will discuss treatment options. Physiology and Risk Factors Myoclonus can occur in patients on chronic therapy with most opioids including morphine, hydromorphone, fentanyl, meperidine, and sufentanil. Higher doses more frequently result in myoclonus, but the dose relationship is variable. Myoclonus can occur with all routes of administration. Current research implicates the 3-glucuronide opioid metabolites as one likely cause of neuroexcitatory side effects, although current understanding is limited. Co-morbid factors including renal failure, electrolyte disturbances, and dehydration can also contribute to myoclonus development. Clinical Scenarios Myoclonus – the uncontrollable twitching and jerking of muscles or muscle groups – usually occurs in the extremities, starting with only an occasional random jerking movement. A patient's spouse may be the first to recognize this symptom. With continued administration, the jerking may increase in frequency; at the extreme, there is constant jerking of random muscle groups in all extremities. As myoclonus worsens, patients may develop other neuroexcitatory signs: hyperalgesia (increased sensitivity to noxious stimuli), delirium with hallucinations, and eventually grand mal seizures. Well meaning clinicians may misinterpret the hyperalgesia as increasing pain, leading to a vicious cycle of increasing dose, increasing hyperalgesia, increasing dose, worsening delirium, and finally seizures. After identifying a patient with possible opioid toxicity, the clinician should complete a physical examination and chart review. Physical Examination Assess frequency of myoclonic jerks. Stand at the bedside and observe a patient for 30-60 seconds. Watch for and count the number of uncontrolled jerking movements. Determine if there is evidence of a new or worsening delirium. Complete a bedside mini-mental assessment. Assess hydration status. Estimate prognosis: hours, days, weeks, months or years? A longer prognosis demands a more definitive change in treatment. Chart review Review the recent opioid analgesic history. What is the current drug and dose? How has the dose changed over the past few days and weeks? Review the medication list for potentially exacerbating drugs. (e.g. haloperidol, phenothiazines) Review recent laboratory studies if available. Check renal and liver function, and for low magnesium, glucose or sodium. References Cherny N, Ripamonti C, Pereira J, et al. Strategies to manage the adverse effects of oral morphine: an evidence based report. J Clin Oncol. 2001; 19:2542-2554. Mercadante S. Pathophysiology and treatment of opioid-related myoclonus in cancer patients. Pain. 1998; 74:5-9. Smith M. Neuroexcitatory effects of morphine and hydromorphone: evidence implicating the 3-glucuronide metabolites. Clinical and Experimental Pharmacology and Physiology. 2000; 27:524-528. Wright A, Mather L, Smith M. Hydromorphone-3-glucuronide, a more potent neuro-excitant than its structural analogue morphine-3-glucuronide. Life Sciences. 2001; 69:409-420. ACGME Competencies: Medical Knowledge, Patient Care Keyword(s): Pain – Evaluation; Pain – Opioids 
#058 Neuroexcitatory Effects of Opioids: Treatment, 2nd ed Author(s): Robin K Wilson PhD and David E Weissman MD Background Fast Fact #57 reviewed the pharmacology and patient assessment aspects of opioid induced neurotoxicity, notably myoclonus. This Fast Fact discusses treatment. General Approach Decisions about the most appropriate treatment approach need to take into account features of the physical examination (the frequency and intensity of symptoms, hydration status, and estimated prognosis) and information from the medical record (temporal pattern of opioid use and dose escalation, other medications, the presence of electrolyte abnormalities and major organ dysfunction). Whenever medically appropriate, easily treatable causes or exacerbating factors should be corrected (e.g. correct hypomagnesemia). Treatment Strategies The range of options for management of pain and direct opioid neurotoxic effects divides into strategies to treat the myoclonus and strategies to reduce the offending opioid. Observation. Mild myoclonus may trouble family members more than the patient. If the patient is satisfied with current therapy, explaining the cause/progression of symptoms may be all that is necessary. Opioid dose reduction. Myoclonus may resolve over a few days with a decrease in opioid dose. Do not reduce the opioid dose solely to control myoclonus at the expense of good pain control. Rotate to a dissimilar opioid . Rotating to a lower dosage of a structurally dissimilar opioid will often reduce myoclonus and other neuroexcitatory effects within 24 hours, while achieving comparable pain control ( Fast Fact #175 discusses opioid structural classes.) Rotation is especially important in patients with opioid-induced hyperalgesia. As a general rule, decrease the morphine equianalgesic dose by at least 50% when switching to a new medication (see Fast Fact#36 ). For patients on very high doses, rotate to a new opioid at 20-25% of the morphine equianalgesic dose. Historically, methadone and fentanyl have been considered to be better opioids to rotate to as they have no active metabolites (which are implicated in the neuroexcitatory effects of other opioids). This observation is empiric, and has not been evaluated in clinical trials; clinicians should be cautious of using methadone without familiarity with its pharmacology (see Fast Facts #75 , 86 ). Adjuvant and other analgesic therapy . Adjuvant analgesics (e.g. anticonvulsants, antidepressants, corticosteroids) or non-drug therapies (e.g. acupuncture, TENS, heat, cold) may allow for opioid reduction, with preservation of analgesia. Benzodiazepines and other drugs to reduce myoclonus . The addition of a benzodiazepine can reduce myoclonus without alteration of the opioid dose, although increasing sedation may be an unwanted side effect. Start with clonazepam 0.5-1 mg at night or 0.5 mg 2-3 times a day. Alternative agents include lorazepam orally or sublingually, starting at 1-2 mg q8 hours. A continuous infusion of midazolam is an expensive but effective option. Alternatives to benzodiazepines include baclofen, gabapentin, and nifedipine. Start baclofen at 5 mg 3 times a day and increase as needed/tolerated to 20 mg 3 times a day. Start gabapentin at 100 mg 3 times a day and increase as needed to 900-3600 mg total a day. Nifedipine (10 mg 3 times a day) can also be used. References Abrahm J. Advances in pain management for older adult patients. Clinics in Geriatric Medicine. 2000; 16:269-311. Cherny N, Ripamonti C, Pereira J, et al. Strategies to manage the adverse effects of oral morphine: an evidence based report. J Clin Oncol. 2001; 19:2542-2554. Ferris D. Controlling myoclonus after high-dosage morphine infusions. American Journal of Health-System Pharmacy. 1999; 56:1009-1010. Hagen N, Swanson R. Strychinine-like multifocal myoclonus and seizures in extremely high-dose opioid administration: treatment strategies. J Pain Symptom Manage. 1997; 14:51-57. Mercadante S. Pathophysiology and treatment of opioid-related myoclonus in cancer patients. Pain. 1998; 74:5-9. Mercadante S. Gabapentin for opioid-related myoclonus in cancer patients. Support Care Cancer. 2001; 9:205-206. Watanabe S. Methadone: the renaissance. J Pall Care. 2001; 17:117-120. ACGME Competencies: Medical Knowledge, Patient Care Keyword(s): Pain – Opioids 
#059 Dealing with Anger, 2nd ed Author(s): Rebekah Wang-Cheng MD, FACP Background Anger is a common emotion expressed by seriously ill patients and their families. A typical reaction by the health professional, confronted by the angry patient or family, is to either get angry back or to physically and psychologically withdraw; neither are helpful coping strategies. A guide to managing these situations is presented below. Look for the underlying source of anger Fear is probably the most common source of anger, especially in the dying and their families – fear of the unknown, being in pain or suffering, the future well-being of family members, abandonment, leaving unfinished business, losing control of bodily functions or cognition, being a burden to the family, and dying alone. Other sources of anger include: 1) a genuine insult – so called “rational anger” (e.g. waiting six hours to see the doctor); 2) organic pathology: frontal lobe mass, dementia or delirium; and 3) personality style/disorder – the person whose approach to much of life is via anger or mistrust. Recognize the direction of anger Recognizing the difference between internal and external anger is critical to effective management, because internal anger may lead to potentially harmful patient consequences. When the patient directs anger internally because of fear and guilt (e.g. I didn’t take care of myself; I’m abandoning my family.), this can lead to withdrawal, self-neglect, anxiety, depression, or a combination of these. Others direct their anger outward at physicians, hospitals, family members or a deity. Particularly in the case of an angry parent of a dying child, he or she may feel helpless and guilty about many things – not bringing the child for medical care soon enough, not being a loving enough or “great” parent (1). This internal guilt and blame can then be displaced towards health care professionals. Engage rather than withdraw from the patient The natural tendency for clinicians is to cut short the office or hospital visit, find ways to avoid contact with the angry patient or family member, or to try to mask his/her own anger in order to continue to interact with the patient. Robert Houston MD has written a very helpful article listing 10 rules for engaging the dying patient which will have a beneficial impact on the physician/patient relationship and the quality of the patient’s end-of-life experience (2). One of his most important tips is to refrain from personalizing the anger when the patient accuses you of “missing the diagnosis” or under treating the pain. Some of his rules which are pertinent to this discussion are: Engage the patient, but do not enmesh with and do the emotional work for the patient. Maintain adult-adult communication rather than fostering the patient’s dependency. Do not personalize the patient’s anger. Adopt a patient-centered worldview by ascertaining his/her values, priorities, hopes. Normalize anger so that the patient can move through this stage. Use the 'BATHE' approach to create an empathic milieu (3) As with any difficult patient situation, communication techniques are especially important so that both the patient and physician do not become further embittered and frustrated. Background: Use active listening to understand the story, the context, the patient's situation. Affect: Name the emotion; for instance, You seem very angry…. It is crucial to validate feelings so the angry person feels that you are listening. Attempting to defuse it, counter it with your own anger or ignore it, will be counter-productive. Acknowledging their right to be angry will help start the healing process and solidify the therapeutic relationship. Troubles: Explore what scares or troubles them the most about their present and future. Just asking the question Tell me what frightens you? will help them to focus on circumstances they may not have considered. Handling: Knowledge and positive action can help mitigate fears and reduce anger. How are they handling the dying – are they making concrete plans about their finances, their things, their family? Have they thought about formal counseling to help deal with the depression, the anger? Empathy: By displaying empathy and concern you can help the person feel understood, less abandoned and alone. Avoid trite statements such as I know what you're going through. Paraphrasing the patient’s comments is an effective way to convey that you heard and are seeking to understand: You feel like it's so unfair that the cancer appeared out of nowhere after all these years. Summary The journey from life to death almost always is accompanied by some degree of anger. A caring, patient clinician can assist the patient and the family in recognizing, mobilizing, and modifying the anger into positive emotional energy. References Grossman L. Understanding anger in parents of dying children. Am Fam Physician. 1998; 58(5):1211-2. Houston RE. The angry dying patient. Prim Care Companion J Clin Psychiatry. 1999; 1:5-8. Stewart MR, Lieberman J, III. The Fifteen Minute Hour: Applied Psychotherapy for the Primary Care Physician. 2nd Edition. Westport, CT: Praeger Publishing; 1993. Rueth TW, Hall SE. Dealing with the anger and hostility of those who grieve. A J Hos Pall Care. 1999; 16:743-746. ACGME Competencies: Interpersonal and Communication Skills, Patient Care Keyword(s): Communication; Psychosocial and Spiritual Experience: Patients, Families, and Clinicians 
#060 Pharmacologic Management of Delirium; Update on Newer Agents, 2nd ed Author(s): Earl Quijada MD and J Andrew Billings MD Background Delirium is a common psychiatric disorder in the terminally ill (See Fast Fact #1 ). Delirium can deeply disturb the patient and family; treatment is generally indicated in both hyperactive or hypoactive delirium. Management options include identifying and treating the underlying cause, as well as symptomatic treatment through non-pharmacological and pharmacological interventions. Common reversible etiologies in advanced terminal illness include drug toxicity, infection, hypotension, hypoxia, hypoglycemia, hyponatremia, hypercalcemia, elevated ammonia, alcohol-sedative drug withdrawal, and sleep deprivation. Benzodiazepines With the exception of treating delirium due to drug withdrawal or anticholinergic excess, neuroleptics are the first-line pharmacological agents for symptomatic management. Benzodiazepines should be avoided unless the source of delirium is alcohol-sedative drug withdrawal or when severe agitation is not controlled by the neuroleptic; these agents can cause “paradoxical” worsening of confusional states. Haloperidol The best studied neuroleptic, and the agent of choice for most patients, is haloperidol (Haldol), which has a favorable side effect profile and can be administered safely through oral and parenteral routes. Starting doses are 0.5 – 1 mg PO or IV (the intramuscular route is also available). Titration can occur by 2 – 5 mg every 1 hour until a total daily requirement is established, which is then administered in 2-3 divided doses per day. Intravenous haloperidol may cause less extrapyramidal symptoms than oral haloperidol. Other neuroleptics Other ‘older’ neuroleptics are probably comparable to haloperidol in controlling delirium (and many are also good anti-emetics), but may have a higher incidence of side effects: extrapyramidal reactions, sedation, and hypotension. Chlorpromazine (Thorazine) has been advocated for dying patients in whom sedation is desired, especially for terminal delirium. Newer atypical neuroleptics The newer, ‘atypical’ neuroleptics olanzapine (Zyprexa), quetiapine (Seroquel), and risperidone (Risperdal) may be helpful in the management of confusional states. Evidence supporting usage of atypical neuroleptics in delirium is scant, so they should not be considered a first-line treatment. However, these agents are associated with fewer drug-induced movement disorders than haloperidol, and may be agents of choice in patients with Parkinson’s disease and related neuromuscular disorders, as well as patients with a history of extrapyramidal reactions from neuroleptics. The starting dose for olanzapine is 5 mg PO every day; after one week, the dose can be raised to 10 mg a day and titrated to 20 mg a day. Quetiapine is initially given 25 mg PO twice a day which can be raised by 25 – 50 mg per dose every 2 – 3 days up to a target of 300 – 400 mg a day, divided into 2 – 3 doses. Risperidone is given 1 – 2 mg PO at night and is gradually raised 1 mg every 2 – 3 days until an effective dose (usually 4 – 6 mg PO hs) is reached. These agents are not available in either intramuscular or intravenous routes. Olanzapine is available as an orally disintegrating tablet. The switch to an atypical neuroleptic may be made abruptly but it is probably wiser to taper off the typical agent slowly while titrating up the atypical agent. Atypical antipsychotics may not work as fast as conventional antipsychotics for acutely aggressive and agitated patients requiring onset of action within minutes. Quetiapine is the most sedating of the newer agents and has potential applicability in treating agitated delirium, especially at the end of life. References Breitbart W, Bruera E, Chochinov H, Lynch M. Neuropsychiatric syndromes and psychological symptoms in patients with advanced cancer. J Pain Symptom Manage. 1995; 10:131-41. Breitbart W, Marotta R, Platt MM, et al. A double-blind trial of haloperidol, chlorpromazine, and lorazepam in the treatment of delirium in hospitalized AIDS patients. Am J Psych. 1996; 153:231-7. Inouye SK, Bogardus ST Jr, Charpentier PA, et al. A multicomponent intervention to prevent delirium in hospitalized older patients. N Engl J Med. 1999; 4:340:669-76. Lawlor PG, Gagnon B, Mancini IL, et al. Occurrence, causes, and outcome of delirium in patients with advanced cancer: a prospective study. Arch Intern Med. 2000; 160:786-94. McIver B, Walsh D, Nelson K. The use of chlorpromazine for symptom control in dying cancer patients. J Pain Symptom Manage. 1994; 9:341-5. Menza MA, Murray GB, Holmes VF, Rafuls WA. Decreased extrapyramidal symptoms with intravenous haloperidol. J Clin Psych. 1987; 48:278-280. Sadock B, Sadock V. Kaplan and Sadock’s Pocket Handbook of Psychiatric Drug Treatment. 3rd Edition. Philadelphia, PA: Lippincott Williams and Williams; 2001. Stahl S. Essential Psychopharmacology: Neuroscientific Basis and Practical Applications. 2nd Edition. New York, NY: Cambridge University Press; 2000. ACGME Competencies: Medical Knowledge, Patient Care Keyword(s): Non-Pain Symptoms and Syndromes 
#061 Use of Psycho-Stimulants in Palliative Care, 2nd ed Author(s): Vicki Jackson MD and Susan Block MD Background More than 95% of patients experience fatigue near the end of life. Chemotherapy, radiation, and administration of opioids all tend to increase tiredness. Depression is also a common cause of suffering at the end of life; about 25% of cancer patients with early stage disease develop depression, in advanced illness more than three-quarters of all patients have symptoms of depression. Uses of Psycho-stimulants Both fatigue and depression can be treated with one of the psycho-stimulants: dextroamphetamine, methylphenidate, or pemoline. Psycho-stimulants act rapidly and are well-tolerated. These medications have 6 potentially beneficial effects for patients with terminal illness: Mood elevation Improved energy Potentiate analgesic effect of opioids Counter opioid-induced sedation Increase appetite Improve cognition Practical Tips For depression, psycho-stimulants are the drug of choice for patients with a relatively short life expectancy of weeks to months because they act quickly, usually within 24-48 hours. Psycho-stimulants are generally safe. However, they should be used with caution in patients with heart disease or cognitive disturbances (e.g. delirium). Pemoline, a milder psycho-stimulant, can rarely cause hepatotoxicity, requiring regular monitoring of hepatic function. Some patients with severe depression and a longer life expectancy benefit from starting a psycho-stimulant and then transitioning to a selective serotonin reuptake inhibitor anti-depressant (SSRI). Psycho-stimulants are also useful to augment the action of SSRIs in patients with severe depression. Drug Onset of action Starting dose Usual Daily Dose Maximal Daily Dose Schedule Dextroamphetamine Methylphenidate <24hrs <24hrs 2.5-5mg 2.5mg 10-20mg 5-10mg 60-90mg 60-90mg 8am and noon* Pemoline 1-2 days 18.75mg 37.5mg 150mg Twice daily *some patients may need a late afternoon booster dose (usually 1/2 the am dose) References Block S. Assessing and Managing Depression in the Terminally Ill Patient. Annals of Internal Medicine. 2000; 132(3):209-218. Roszans M, Dreisbach A, Lertora JJL, Kahn MJ. Palliative uses of methylphenidate in patients with cancer: a review. J Clin Onc. 2002;20:335-339. ACGME Competencies: Medical Knowledge, Patient Care Keyword(s): Non-Pain Symptoms and Syndromes 
#062 Preventing Neurologic Deficits: Early Diagnosis of Epidural Metastases, 2nd ed Author(s): David E Weissman MD Background Epidural metastases are very common in patients with advanced cancer. Cancers most often associated with epidural spread include lung, prostate, breast, kidney, myeloma and melanoma. They are also common in testicular cancer, lymphomas, and Hodgkin’s disease. Ovarian and pancreatic cancer rarely lead to epidural metastases. Tumor reaches the epidural space via contiguous spread from adjacent vertebral body metastases or, less commonly, from direct extension of tumor through the intervertebral foramina from adjacent tissue (e.g. retroperitoneal lymphoma or posterior lung cancer). The importance of early diagnosis Back pain is the herald symptom of epidural metastases; occurring, on average, many weeks to months prior to any neurological damage. That is, pain occurs long before there is any direct compression of the spinal cord, at a time when early diagnosis can be established and treatment started. Neurological deficits from spinal cord compression are a late finding of epidural metastases; serious damage is usually preventable by early diagnosis. Characteristics of pain from epidural metastases Pain from epidural metastases occurs due to vertebral body fracture, structural spine instability, periosteal or nerve root irritation. The various descriptions of pain from epidural metastases are protean. Most commonly, patients say it is ‘dull’ or ‘aching,’ often with a sensation of ‘muscle spasm.’ Pain typically worsens gradually, so that over a period of weeks patients require increasing analgesics and have a corresponding decrease in function. This is in contrast to benign compression fractures, where severe pain occurs suddenly, followed by slow improvement over weeks. If there is nerve root irritation, patients will describe neuropathic symptoms in a radicular pattern (e.g. burning or shock-like pain, and/or dysesthesias). The pain is usually located in the central back or paravertebral region and/or in a radicular distribution. Commonly missed radicular symptoms are tip of shoulder pain from C7-T1 metastases; lateral or anterior rib pain from thoracic metastases; anterior abdominal, flank or hip pain from T12-L2 metastases. Pain is often made worse by increasing the spinal cord load that occurs with standing, coughing or valsalva. Pain in the thoracic region is particularly worrisome due to the narrow spinal canal and minimal epidural space; patients with thoracic metastases often complain of increasing pain when recumbant. Diagnostic strategies The key to early diagnosis is a high index of suspicion. A good rule to use is that the cancer patient with progressive back or radicular pain, for more than 1-2 weeks, has epidural metastases unless proven otherwise; this is especially true in the high risk cancers (breast, prostate, lung, myeloma). Various protocols describing diagnostic approaches have been developed to aid clinicians (see references); all agree that in the setting of a normal neurological examination, early radiological imaging is essential for diagnosis and treatment planning. Rodichok et al demonstrated in 1981 that plain spine x-rays, in the region of back pain, can be an excellent first screening tool; MRI is the definitive diagnostic study and is necessary for planning radiation or surgical intervention. If neurological signs have become evident, emergent MRI is the diagnostic test of choice. Summary/Key Teaching Points: Epidural metastases (tumor in the epidural space), occurs prior to actual spinal cord compression and neurological damage. Pain will precede neurologic deficits by weeks to months. Early diagnosis will preserve neurological function. Progressive back or radicular pain is an indication for radiographic investigation to rule out epidural metastases, especially in high risk cancers. References Schmidt MH, Klimo P Jr, Vrionis FD. Metastatic spinal cord compression. J Natl Comp Cancer Network. 2005; 3(5):711-9. Byrne TN. Spinal cord compression from epidural metastases. NEJM. 1992; 3217:614-619. Rodichok LD, Harper GR, Ruckdeschel JC. Early diagnosis of spinal epidural metastases. Am J Med. 1981; 70:1181-1188. Posner JB. Neurologic complications of cancer. Contemporary Neurology Series, Vol 45. Philadelphia, PA: FA Davis; 1995. ACGME Competencies: Medical Knowledge, Patient Care Keyword(s): Non-Pain Symptoms and Syndromes 
#063 The Legal Liability of Under-Treatment of Pain, 2nd ed Author(s): Eric J Warm MD and David E Weissman MD Background It is well recognized that physician’s fear of regulatory scrutiny (DEA, state medical boards), is a major contributor to the problem of under treatment of pain. A landmark lawsuit should be a wake-up call for all physicians that this type of practice poses its own legal liability. An 85-year-old California man with metastatic lung carcinoma spent the final week of his life in severe pain. Three years after his death his children sued his doctor alleging that that the physician had failed to prescribe drugs powerful enough to relieve their father's suffering. This was one of the first U.S. cases in which a doctor has gone on trial for allegedly under-treating a patient's pain. By a 9 to 3 vote the jury decided that the physician’s lack of attention to pain constituted elder abuse, awarding the family $1.5 million (the amount was reduced to $250,000). To win, lawyers convinced the jury that under-treatment of pain was ‘reckless negligence.’ Until recently, lawyers would have considered such a suit un-winnable. Given politically savvy aging baby boomers, as well as the preponderance of sound scientific evidence for the proper assessment and treatment of pain, we can probably expect more such verdicts. Practical Advice Here are some tips for how physicians can better protect themselves from charges of under-treatment of pain: Review your own practice – are you currently meeting The Joint Commission (JCAHO; http://www.jointcommission.org ) pain guidelines? Improve your knowledge and skills in pain assessment and treatment. Some states, such as California, now require mandatory pain CME. Learn about and utilize your local consultation resources for pain management. Improve your knowledge and skills in assessing substance abuse disorders; learn about and utilize your local resources for substance abuse referrals and treatment. Improve your understanding of the drug regulatory system and how it functions. Learn about the common triggers for regulatory review. Go to The Pain and Policy Study Group ( http://www.painpolicy.wisc.edu /) for information about federal and state regulatory laws and regulations. Become active in your hospital pain improvement efforts. Check with your hospital Quality Improvement department and their efforts to meet The Joint Commission pain guidelines. Become active with your state Cancer Pain Initiative; go to the Alliance of State Pain Initiatives ( http://aspi.wisc.edu ) to find information about your state activities. Summary Ideally physicians should not use the fear of lawsuits to help guide medical care, but evidence shows that they do. In a way, this attention on improved pain management may become a silver lining in the black cloud of our litigious society. 2009 Update: See Reference (7) for a discussion of more recent developments in the tort for under-treated pain. References Stieg RL, et al: Roadblocks to effective pain treatment. Med Clin N Amer, 1999;83(3): 809-821. Okie S. Doctor's Duty to Ease Pain At Issue in Calif. Lawsuit. Washington Post. Monday, May 7, 2001: Page A03. Crane M, Treating pain: damned if you don’t? Med Economics. Nov 19, 2001: pp 67-69. Weissman DE. Doctors, Opioids and the law: The Effect of Drug Regulations on Cancer Pain Management. Semin Oncol. 1993; 20(Suppl A):53-58. Gilson AM, Joranson DE. Controlled substances and pain management: Changes in knowledge and attitudes of state medical regulators. J Pain Symptom Manage. 2001; 21(3):227-237. Joranson DE, Maurer MA, Gilson AM, Ryan KM, Nischik JA. Annual review of state pain policies, 2000. Madison, WI: Pain & Policy Studies Group, University of Wisconsin Comprehensive Cancer Center; 2001. Kollas CD, Boyer-Kollas B. Evolving medicolegal issues in palliative medicine. J Palliat Med. 2007; 10:1395-1401. Available at: http://dx.doi.org/doi:10.1089/jpm.2007.0092. ACGME Competencies: Medical Knowledge Keyword(s): Pain – Evaluation; Ethics, Law, Policy Health Systems 
#064 Informing Significant Others of a Patient's Death, 2nd ed Author(s): Diane Midland BSW, MS Introduction This Fast Fact reviews the components of a sensitive notification of loved ones when a patient dies. The physician is a key figure in the death notification process. Family and friends who are present at the time of death look to the physician for information, reassurance and direction regarding the weeks and months ahead. The lasting impression and memories that family members have regarding the manner in which they received word that their loved one died may affect the grief process and eventual integration of the loss within the survivors' world. Research has demonstrated that the skills of compassion and sensitivity can be learned and must be incorporated into the practice of all physicians. Preparation Confer with nursing and other staff working with the family/significant others. Review the medical record (including any advance directive). Examine the patient; confirm death (see Fast Fact #4 ). Find a private place to meet with family/significant others. Involve other members of the interdisciplinary team (e.g. nurse or chaplain) in the notification process. If possible, learn the names of those you will be talking with and their relationship to the deceased. Meeting with the Family/Significant Others Introduce yourself and identify those present. In situations where there are family and friends present, ask the next-of-kin who they would like with them during the conversation. Identify and respect ethnic, cultural or religious traditions (see Fast Fact #26 ). Invite those present to sit down with you. Use body language, eye contact and touch (introductory hand shake or clasp), if appropriate and accepted by family/significant others. Express your condolence (e.g. I’m sorry for your loss; My condolences to you and your family.) Talk openly about the death. Use 'died' or 'dead' during the initial conversation. Listen for the words used by the family/significant others to describe death and use their term(s) throughout the remaining discussion. Refer to the deceased by name. If requested, explain the cause of death in non-medical terms. Allow time for questions; be open to acknowledging that there may be things you don't know. Offer assurance that everything possible was done to keep the patient comfortable. Be prepared for a range of emotional expression. Do not offer sedation as a way to deal with expressions of emotion. (Mild sedation for a brief time period may be considered to assist with insomnia.) Offer the opportunity to view the deceased. Prepare family/significant others for how the deceased will appear; model touching and talking to the deceased. Offer time alone with the deceased and assurance that survivors will not be rushed. Provide time for the family/significant others to process the reality of the death before discussing autopsy or tissue/organ donation. Let family/significant others know that you will return, should questions arise or they desire additional information. Provide information about how the family can reach you after they leave the facility. Follow-up Personalize and sign a sympathy card to the bereaved (see Fast Fact #22 ). Consider attending the wake, funeral, or memorial service. Consider referral to a bereavement support service or agency, particularly if children are involved. Encourage the bereaved to schedule a physical exam four to six months after the death. Invite the bereaved to meet with you regarding autopsy results or to discuss unresolved questions. References Schaefer C, Quesenbery CP Jr, Wi S. (1995). Mortality following conjugal bereavement and the effects of a shared environment. Am J Epidemiology. 1995; 144(12):1142-52. Shively P, Midland D, eds. The Art of Compassionate Death Notification. La Crosse, WI: Gundersen Lutheran Medical Foundation; 1999. Tolle SW, Bascom PB, Hickman DH, Benson JA. Communication between physician and surviving spouses following patient deaths. J Gen Int Med. 1986; 1:309- 314. Witter DM, Tolle SW, Moseley JR. A bereavement program: good care, quality assurance, and risk management. Hosp Health Services Admin. 1990; 35(2):263-275. Zunin HS, Zunin LM. The Art of Condolence, What to Write, What to Say, What to do at a Time of Loss. New York, NY: Harpers Collins; 1991. ACGME Competencies: Interpersonal and Communication Skills, Patient Care Keyword(s): Communication 
#065 Establishing End-of-Life Goals: The Living Will Interview, 2nd ed Author(s): Bruce Ambuel PhD Introduction “When a person faces a fatal disease that is likely incurable, he or she faces specific decisions not only about medical treatment but also about broader, existential issues concerning the best way in which to spend his or her remaining time.” (Hammes 1998) Doctor-patient discussions about end-of-life treatment are often framed as a choice between “medical treatment vs. treatment withdrawal.” When framed in this manner, treatment withdrawal is a negative choice that often implies giving up, abandonment, not giving the doctor a chance to do his or her job, and not caring; this option would seem to be no option at all. Bernard Hammes PhD suggests that the physician can reframe the doctor-patient dialogue about end-of-life treatment by starting a conversation with the patient focused on the question “How can we help you live well?” The goal of the living well interview is to elicit the patient’s perspective regarding how they want to spend their remaining time. Treatment decisions are then discussed within this broader context of patient goals and hopes. Treatments become tools for achieving patient goals. The Living Well Discussion When: Begin soon after the diagnosis of a life-limiting condition. Who: Physician and patient with support from others: family, nurse, chaplain, etc. How: Begin by expressing a need and interest to understand the patient’s views. The physician’s initial goal is to develop a broad understanding of the patient’s hopes and goals, not to develop a specific medical plan. Specific treatment decisions are made after the patient and health care team have developed an understanding of the patient’s broader goals. What to say: Given what we now know about your medical condition… How can we help you live well? What makes you happy? Maintaining or fulfilling what activities or experiences are most important for you to feel your life has quality, or for you to live well? What fears or worries do you have about your illness or medical care? If you have to choose between living longer and quality of life, how would you approach this balance? What needs or services would you like to discuss? What do you hope for your family? Are there any special events or activities that you are looking forward to? What sustains you when you face serious challenges in your life? Do you have religious or spiritual beliefs that are important to you? In what way do you feel you could make this time especially meaningful to you? References Hammes BJ, Bottner W, et al. Expanding frames…opening choices: reconsidering conversations about medical care when cure is not possible. Illness Crisis Loss. 1998; 6(4):3252-56. Hammes BJ, Rooney BL. Death and end-of-life planning in one midwestern community. Arch Int Med. 1998; 158:383-390. ACGME Competencies: Interpersonal and Communication Skills, Patient Care Keyword(s): Communication 
#066 Radiation for Palliation - Part 1, 2nd ed Author(s): Carolyn Rutter MD and David E Weissman MD Background Radiation therapy (XRT) is used with palliative intent to improve quality of life by improving function and/or diminishing symptoms – most commonly pain, bleeding, or pressure on vital structures. This Fast Fact describes the physiology and methods of delivering radiation therapy; Fast Fact #66 discusses common indications for and outcomes of palliative XRT. How it works XRT is the use of ionizing radiation to damage a cell’s DNA. This can happen to a DNA molecule itself via a direct effect of the radiation (this is less common), or indirectly via an oxygen compound (OH, HOOH) which reacts with a DNA molecule (this pathway is more common). Damage only occurs in cells within the radiation field—the area through which the radiation beam passes. Both malignant and normal cells within the field are affected. Malignant cells are less efficient at repairing DNA damage and are, therefore, more likely to die. The goal is to design a radiation field that includes all of the tumor cells while excluding as much normal tissue as possible. Types of radiation therapy XRT can be delivered 1) from outside the body as external beam radiation (EBR), 2) from within the body by placement of a radiation source near the cancer (brachytherapy), or 3) as a radio-pharmaceutical given by mouth or by intravenous injection (e.g. Strontium89). Fractionation In EBR patients typically receive one fraction per day, but other schedules are sometimes used (e.g. hyperfractionation, or at least 2 doses per day). Fractionation takes advantage of the different rates at which malignant and non-malignant cells repair damage caused by XRT; it gives normal tissues an opportunity to recover while continually reducing the tumor cell population. Dosing Radiation doses are described in units called Gray (Gy) or centiGray (cGy): 1 Gy = 100 cGy. Note: in the older literature, the term rad was used: 1 rad = 1 cGy. A radiation prescription includes the site being treated, beam orientation and number (e.g. two beams, AP and PA), beam type (photons or electrons) and energy (in Volts), dose per fraction (typical daily doses for palliative EBR range from 150-400 cGy), number of fractions per day, and total dose. A radiation boost is an extra dose of radiation, given during the last treatments, to a smaller field within the original field. The total administered dose is based on a balance between giving enough radiation to control the tumor while respecting normal tissue tolerance to minimize the risk of late side effects. Different tissues have different radiation tolerances; liver and kidney can only tolerate a small total radiation dose ( < 2400 cGy), whereas bone and peripheral nerves can tolerate much larger total doses (>5000 cGy). Simulation Prior to the first treatment, patients undergo simulation, where the exact location of the field is mapped. Tattoo marks are sometimes placed on the skin to help ensure that the treatment field can be reproduced in the same location at every treatment. Delivering EBR If the radiation prescription calls for daily fractions, patients come to the radiation therapy department once a day, five days a week. Most palliative XRT lasts one to three weeks (treatment for curative intent often lasts 5-7 weeks). Treatments are delivered inside a shielded, enclosed room. A radiation therapist operates the radiation machine (typically a linear accelerator) from outside the room while watching the patient on a camera. Each daily treatment takes only a few minutes and is painless. Toxicity At least once a week patients see the radiation oncologist to evaluate response and assess/treat toxicity. Toxicity depends upon the area being treated and, except for fatigue, is limited to tissues within that field. Early/acute toxicities occur during or shortly after treatment and resolve within one to two months (e.g. oral mucositis during oral radiation). Late toxicities occur months to years after treatment (e.g. coronary artery disease following chest radiation). Early toxicity is related to inflammation and death of rapidly dividing cells (such as in the skin or gastrointestional tract), while late effects result from vascular changes and cell death of slowly dividing cells. Radiation oncologists have a host of medications, salves, and mouth rinses to help alleviate acute toxicities (see Fast Facts #121 , 130 , 185 ). References Ciezki JP. Palliative Radiotherapy. Seminars in Oncology. 2000; 27(1):90-3. Kirkbride P. The role of radiation therapy in palliative care. J Palliat Care. 1995; 11(1):19-26. Perez C, Brady L, Chao KSC. (Eds). Radiation Oncology: Management Decisions. 3rd Ed. Philadelphia, PA: Lippincott-Raven; 1999. Tisdale BA. When to consider radiation therapy for your patient. Am Fam Phys. 1999; 59(5):1177-84. ACGME Competencies: Medical Knowledge, Patient Care Keyword(s): Pain – Non-Opioids 
#067 Radiation for Palliation - Part 2, 2nd ed Author(s): Carolyn Rutter MD and David E Weissman MD Background Fast Fact #66 discussed the physiology and methods of delivering radiation therapy (XRT). This Fast Fact reviews the common indications for and outcomes of palliative XRT. Decision Making The most important decision when considering palliative XRT is to assess the balance between anticipated functional/symptomatic benefit versus time spent receiving therapy and acute toxicities. It is vital to review 1) the estimated prognosis, 2) current and anticipated best functional status outcome, 3) expected toxicities, and 4) treatment burden—time spent coming to XRT site, time off work for family, and cost. Bone Metastases External beam therapy achieves pain relief in over 75% of patients with healing and reossification occurring in 65-85% of lytic lesions in non-fractured bone. Pain relief may begin within the first few treatments and peaks by 4 weeks following XRT completion. A standard radiation prescription in the US is 300 cGy x 10 fractions. However, data exist to support a single large fraction (800 cGy x 1) for extremity lesions, especially in patients with expected survival < 3 months. Surgical fixation prior to XRT is indicated for large lesions, when >50% of the cortex is replaced by tumor, or when fracture has occurred in a weight-bearing bone. Radionuclide therapy with Strontium89 or Samarium153 is indicated for multiple sites of painful bone metastases (typically breast or prostate cancer). Peak analgesic effect occurs 3-6 weeks following treatment. Side effects are hematological with decreased blood counts in 10-30% of patients. Worsening of pain (a ‘pain flare’) may occur following administration and prior to pain relief. Radionuclide therapy can be combined with external beam radiation and can be given more than once. Epidural Metastases and Spinal Cord Compression External beam radiation is the primary definitive treatment for epidural metastases with or without spinal cord compression, in conjunction with a short-course of steroids. The standard US prescription is 300 cGy x 10 fractions, although shorter courses can be used if needed (e.g. 400 cGy x 5). Results of treatment are directly related to the neurological status at the time treatment starts. Ambulatory patients at the start of treatment generally remain ambulatory, while non-ambulatory patients are unlikely to have return of weight-bearing function. Indications for surgery include no tissue diagnosis, spinal instability, bone fragments causing cord damage and progression during/after XRT. Brain Metastases Whole-brain external beam radiation or – for small lesions – stereotactic radiosurgery (e.g. ‘Gamma Knife’), can relieve symptoms and prolong survival. The standard US prescription is 300 cGy x 10 fractions; although shorter courses can be used (e.g. 400 cGy x 5). Surgery is indicated for good prognosis patients with a single accessible lesion or for refractory neurological symptoms (e.g. seizures). Other Indications The following are all appropriate for consideration of palliative radiation: Obstruction: vascular (superior vena cava syndrome), esophagus, airway, rectum, biliary tract Pain: adrenal metastases causingflank pain, tumors causing nerve impingement Bleeding: stomach, esophagus, head/neck cancer, bladder, cervix Ulceration/fungation References Ciezki JP. Palliative Radiotherapy. Seminars in Oncology. 2000; 27(1):90-3. Kirkbride P. The role of radiation therapy in palliative care. J Palliat Care. 1995; 11(1):19-26. Perez C, Brady L, Chao KSC, eds. Radiation Oncology: Management Decisions. 3rd Ed. Philadelphia, PA: Lippincott-Raven; 1999. Tisdale BA. When to consider radiation therapy for your patient. Am Fam Phys. 1999; 59(5):1177-84. Labow DA, Laperriere NJ. Emergency treatment of malignant extradural spinal cord compression: an evidence-based guideline. J Clin Oncol. 1998; 16(4):1613-24. Kirkbride P, Bezjak. Palliative Radiation Therapy. In: Berger A, Portenoy R, Weissman DE, eds. Principles and Practice of Palliative Care and Supportive Oncology. New York, NY: Lippincott Wilkins & William; 2002. ACGME Competencies: Medical Knowledge, Patient Care Keyword(s): Pain – Non-Opioids 
#068 Is it Pain or Addiction?, 2nd ed Author(s): David E Weissman MD Background A very commonly requested educational topic by physicians, concerning pain, surrounds differentiating the patient in pain vs. the patient with a substance abuse disorder. The key to proper assessment lies in understanding 1) the definitions of tolerance, physical and psychological dependence, 2) the components of an addiction assessment, and 3) the differential diagnosis of the symptom of “pain.” Definitions Tolerance: the need to increase a drug to achieve the same effect. In clinical practice, significant opioid tolerance is uncommon. Tolerance may be present in the pain patient or the addict; by itself it is not diagnostic of addiction. Physical Dependence: development of a withdrawal syndrome when a drug is suddenly discontinued or an antagonist is administered. Most patients on chronic opioids will develop physical dependence; its presence cannot be used to differentiate the pain patient from the addict. Psychological Dependence (Addiction): overwhelming involvement with the acquisition and use of a drug, characterized by: loss of control, compulsive drug use, and use despite harm. Research suggests that opioids used to treat pain rarely leads to psychological dependence. Addiction (Substance Abuse) Assessment Assess for addiction in the domains presented in the list below (see Reference 1). Note: one positive item from the list does not establish a substance abuse disorder. Rather, the diagnosis rests on a pattern of behavior that includes several positive findings (see Reference 4). Loss of control of drug use (has no partially filled med bottles; will not bring in bottles for verification). Adverse life consequences – use despite harm (legal, work, social, family). Indications of drug seeking behavior (reports lost/stolen meds, requests for high-street value meds). Drug taking reliability (frequently takes extra doses, does not use meds as prescribed). Abuse of other drugs (current/past abuse of prescription or street drugs). Contact with drug culture (family or friends with substance abuse disorders). Cooperation with treatment plan (does not follow-up with referrals or use of non-drug treatments). Differential Diagnosis The differential diagnosis for a patient reporting “pain” includes physical causes (broken leg, sciatica, pseudoaddiction – see Fast Fact #69 ); psychological causes (depression, anxiety, hypochondriasis, somatization disorder, etc.); spiritual causes (impending death, grief); substance abuse; and secondary gain/malingering/criminal intent (desire for attention, disability benefit, or financial gain from pain medications). References Sees KL, Clark HW. Opioid use in the treatment of chronic pain: assessment of addiction. J Pain Symptom Manage. 1993; 8:257-264. Savage SR. Addication in the treatment of pain: significance, recognition and management. J Pain Symptom Manage. 1993; 8:265-278. Eisendrath SJ. Psychiatric aspects of chronic pain. Neurology. 1995; 45:S26-S34. Passik SD, Kirsh KL, Portenoy RK. Understanding aberrant drug-taking behavior: addiction redefined for palliative care and pain management settings. Principles and Practice of Supportive Oncology Updates. 1999; 2:1-12. ACGME Competencies: Medical Knowledge, Patient Care Keyword(s): Pain – Evaluation 
#069 Pseudoaddiction, 2nd ed Author(s): David E Weissman MD Introduction The term pseudoaddiction was first used in 1989 to describe an iatrogenic syndrome resulting from poorly treated pain. The index case was a 17 year old man with leukemia, pneumonia, and chest wall pain. The patient displayed behaviors (moaning, grimacing, increasing requests for analgesics) wrongly interpreted by the physicians and nurses as indicators of addiction, rather than of inadequately treated pain. Put simply, pseudoaddiction is something that we do to patients, through our fears and mis-understanding of pain, pain treatment, and addiction (see also Fast Fact #68 ). Diagnostic Features Behaviors that suggest to the health care provider the possibility of psychological dependence (addiction): Moaning or other physical behaviors in which the patient is trying to demonstrate to the provider that they are in pain. Clock-watching or repeated requests for medication prior to the prescribed interval. Pain complaints that seem “excessive” to the given pain stimulus. Inadequately prescribed and titrated opioids analgesics; typically the use of an opioid of inadequate potency and/or at an excessive dosing interval (e.g. oral morphine q6 hours PRN – see Fast Fact #18 ). Assessment Anytime there is a suggestion, because of escalating pain behaviors, that a patient on opioids may be “addicted,” pseudoaddiction should be considered. Perform a complete pain assessment and review the recent analgesic history: Is this a pain syndrome that typically responds to opioids? Is the current opioid dose, route and schedule appropriate? If so, has a reasonable attempt at dose escalation been made? Is there any past medical history to suggest a substance abuse disorder? Complete a comprehensive addiction assessment if such a disorder is suspected. Pseudoaddiction improves with the provision of adequate analgesia, including opioids. In contrast, behaviors associated with a substance abuse disorder will not change. Management If you believe the current problem is pseudoaddiction, there are two key management steps: Establish trust. A primary issue in most cases is the loss of trust between the patient and the health care providers. The physician and nursing staff should meet to discuss how they will restore a trusting therapeutic relationship; outside assistance from a pain or palliative care service can be helpful. Plan to meet with the patient and openly discuss the events leading up to the current problem. Engage the patient in the decision-making process about the current and future use of analgesics. Prescribe opioids at pharmacologically appropriate doses and schedules. Aggressively dose escalate until analgesia is achieved or toxicities develop (see Fast Facts #18 , 20 , 36 ). Frequently re-evaluate progress in pain management and ask for consultation assistance. References Weissman DE, Haddox JD. Opioid pseudoaddiction. Pain. 1989; 36:363-366. Sees KL, Clark HW. Opioid use in the treatment of chronic pain: assessment of addiction. J Pain Symptom Manage. 1993; 8:257-264. ACGME Competencies: Medical Knowledge, Patient Care Keyword(s): Pain – Evaluation 
#070 PRN Range Analgesic Orders, 2nd ed Author(s): Debra B Gordon RN, MS, FAAN Introduction Use of PRN opioid range orders (e.g. ‘morphine 2-6 mg IV q2h PRN’) is a common practice designed to provide flexibility in dosing to meet an individual’s unique needs. However, range orders have been shown to be a source of medication errors. It is critical that physicians, nurses, and pharmacists share a common understanding of how to properly write, interpret, and carry out PRN range orders. Considerations for writing and interpreting PRN range opioid orders: Reasonable range A range order should be large enough to provide options for dose titration, but small enough to ensure safety. The maximum allowable difference between the high and low dose for analgesic dose range orders should be no more than four times the lowest dose (eg. four times 2 mg is 8 mg). Patient’s prior drug exposure If the patient is opioid-naïve, the first dose administered should be the lowest dose in the range; if the patient is opioid tolerant, or has received a recent dose with inadequate pain relief and tolerable side effects, a dose on the higher end of the range is acceptable. Prior response Inquire about this patient’s response to previous doses. How much relief did prior doses provide, and how long did it last? Did the patient experience side effects? Age For very young or elderly patients, start low and go slow – begin with a low dose and titrate up slowly and carefully. Liver and renal function If your patient has hepatic or renal insufficiency, anticipate a more pronounced peak effect and a longer duration of action. Pain severity As a general rule, for moderate to severe pain increase the dose by 50-100%; do not increase by >100% at one time. To “fine-tune” the dose once pain is at a mild level, increase or decrease by 25%. Anticipated pain duration Is the pain acute, chronic, or progressive (likely to worsen)? In other words, is the patient likely to require more or less analgesic over time? Kinetics Know the onset, peak, and duration of action for the specific drug ordered. Unlike scheduled long-acting opioid formulations, doses of short-acting opioids can be increased at each specified dosing interval, Co-morbidities Debilitated patients, or those with respiratory insufficiency, may be at more risk for hypoxia if oversedated. Use of other sedating drugs When other CNS depressants are administered in combination with opioids, the dose of each medication required to achieve the desired effect may be 30-50% less than if either drug was administered alone. Combination drugs Limit doses of combination drugs: opioids with acetaminophen or an NSAID. Average adults should not receive more than 4000 mg of acetaminophen in 24 hours. Combinations drugs may contain as much as 750mg of acetaminophen per tablet. If substantial upward dose titration is required or anticipated, use opioid-only preparations. Example Opioid naïve patient arrives with the order ‘Morphine sulfate 2-6 mg IV every 2h PRN pain.’ Give 2 mg for first dose. Reassess within 30 minutes. If adequate relief, reassess within next 2 hours. If no side effects but inadequate relief – may give 4 mg more in 30 minutes or when time to peak effect has passed from first dose. Total dose therefore is 6 mg in a 2-hour period. Document patient response to PRN dosing Reassess pain relief, side effects and adverse events produced by treatment, and the impact of pain and treatment effects on patient function, once sufficient time has elapsed to reach peak effect: 15-30 minutes after parenteral drug therapy or 1 hour after oral administration of a PRN analgesic or non-pharmacologic intervention. Reassessments may be done less frequently for patients with chronic stable pain or for patients who have exhibited good pain control without side effects after 24 hours of stable therapy. This Fast Fact was adapted with permission from the University of Wisconsin Hospital & Clinics, Madison, WI Pain Patient Care Team ‘Pain Management Fast Facts – 5 Minute Inservice’ series. Reference Gordon DB, Dahl J, Phillips P et al. The use of “as-needed” range orders for opioid analgesics in the management of acute pain: a consensus statement of the American Society for Pain Management Nursing and the American Pain Society. Pain Management Nursing. 2004; 5:53-58. ACGME Competencies: Medical Knowledge, Patient Care Keyword(s): Pain – Opioids 
#071 Meperidine for Pain: What's all the fuss?, 2nd ed Author(s): David E Weissman MD Background Meperidine (MP) is a synthetic opioid, chemically related to the anti-diarrhea agents diphenoxylate and loperamide (Imodium). This Fast Fact discusses the pharmacology of MP and concerns about its use as an analgesic. Pharmacology MP produces analgesia by binding to the mu-opioid receptor, as does morphine, producing the same effects and toxicities as morphine. 75-100 mg of parenteral MP has the same analgesic effect of ~10 mg parenteral morphine (see Fast Fact #36 ). MP has a shorter duration of action than morphine, only 2.5-3.5 hours. Oral MP is a very low-potency opioid: 300 mg = 30 mg oral morphine. Why is it controversial? Prior to the 1990s, MP was the most commonly prescribed drug for post-operative pain, largely by the intramuscular route, ordered PRN at a q4-6 hour dosing interval. Since physicians learned how to manage pain from their experiences with surgical patients, MP was the parenteral opioid physicians were most familiar with and so the opioid they typically used for any severe pain problem. However, due to its relatively low potency, short duration of action, and toxic metabolite (see below), MP is a poor analgesic choice. Over 25 years ago, it became widely recognized that continued MP administration over several days leads to a syndrome of CNS excitation, with tremors, myoclonus, delirium, and seizures. This syndrome, due to accumulation of the metabolite normeperidine, is more prevalent in the elderly or in patients with renal dysfunction. Finally, MP was established in medical lore as the drug of choice for certain pain conditions, notably pancreatitis/biliary colic and sickle cell pain. In fact, there is little research supporting the contention that MP is the drug of choice for pancreatitis. A review of opioid impact on biliary pressure found contradictory results from in vivo biliary manometry studies and only anecdotal reports documenting significant clinical impact. Recent consensus reports on sickle cell pain have specifically recommended not using MP, due to its short duration and toxic metabolite. What are the recommendations? Every national pain management clinical practice guideline published since 1990 has advised that parenteral MP is not appropriate for a) long-term use (beyond several days), b) any chronic pain syndrome, c) the elderly, or d) patients with renal dysfunction. The American Pain Society recommends ‘meperidine should not be used for more than 48 hours for acute pain in patients without renal or CNS disease, or at doses greater than 600 mg/24 hours, and should not be prescribed for chronic pain.’ In view of all the national guidelines, some hospitals have removed MP from their formulary, and others restrict use to short-term, procedure related analgesia (e.g. for bone marrow biopsies, colonoscopies). What is the bottom line? There is little rationale for prescribing parenteral MP and no justification for using oral MP. Parenteral MP is a reasonable choice only when a) there is intolerance to all other opioids, and/or b) very brief analgesia is needed. References Principles of Analgesic Use in the Treatment of Acute and Cancer Pain. 5th Ed. Glenview IL: American Pain Society; 2003. Available at: http://www.ampainsoc.org/pub/principles.htm. Acute Pain Management Guideline Panel. Acute pain management: Operative or Medical Procedures and Trauma Clinical Practice Guideline. AHCPR Publication No. 92-0032. Available at: http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/books/bv.fcgi?rid=hstat6.chapter.32241. Management of Cancer Pain. Clinical Practice Guideline No. 9; AHCPR Publication No. 94-0592.Rockville, MD. Agency for Health Care Policy and Research, US Department of Health and Human Services, Public Health Service; 1992, 1994. Available at: http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/books/bv.fcgi?rid=hstat6.chapter.18803. Clinical Practice Guideline: Pain Management in the Long-Term Care Setting. American Medical Directors Association, 1999. Most recent version of these guidelines available at: http://www.amda.com/tools/cpg/chronicpain.cfm. Simopoulos TT, et al. Use of meperidine in patient-controlled analgesia and the development of normeperidine toxic reactions. Arch Surg. 2002; 137:84-88. Isenhower HL, Mueller BA. Selection of narcotic analgesics for pain associated with pancreatitis. Am J Health-Syst Pharm. 1998; 55:480-486. Guideline for the Management of Acute and Chronic Pain in Sickle Cell Disease. Glenview, IL: American Pain Society; 1999. Available at: http://www.ampainsoc.org/pub/sc.htm . ACGME Competencies: Medical Knowledge, Patient Care Keyword(s): Pain – Opioids 
#072 Opioid Infusion Titration Orders, 2nd ed Author(s): David E Weissman MD Introduction This Fast Fact will discuss appropriate ways to write opioid infusion titration orders. A bad example: ‘ Morphine 2-10mg/hour, titrate to pain relief.’ What is wrong with this order? This order places full responsibility for dose titration upon the nurse. It provides no guidance regarding how fast to titrate (e.g. every hour, every shift?) or dose titration intervals (e.g. for poorly treated pain, should the dose be raised from 2 to 3 mg, 2 to 10 mg, other?). It poses the potential for overdosage by too zealous dose escalation and provides only one option for poorly controlled pain – increasing the continuous infusion rate. Given that it takes at least 8 hours to achieve steady-state blood levels after a basal dose change, it makes no pharmacological sense to dose escalate the basal dose more frequently than q 8 hours. A better way to write this order: ‘ Morphine 2 mg/hour and morphine 2 mg q 15 minutes for breakthrough pain (or 2 mg via PCA dose). RN may dose escalate the PRN dose to a maximum of 4 mg within 30 minutes for poorly controlled pain.’ Why is this better? This order is preferred as it provides a basal rate and a breakthrough dose. The breakthrough dose has a peak effect within 5-10 minutes. Thus, if the breakthrough dose is inadequate it can be safely increased, as often as every 15-30 minutes, to achieve analgesia – without a need for rapid upward titration of the basal rate. Reassess the need for a change in the basal rate no more frequently than every 8 hours; use the number of administered bolus doses as a rough guide when calculating a new basal rate. However, never increase the basal rate by more than 100% at any one time. When increasing the basal rate, always administer a loading dose so as to more rapidly achieve steady-state blood levels. References Principles of Analgesic Use in the Treatment of Acute and Cancer Pain. 5th Ed. Glenview, IL: American Pain Society; 2003. Available at: http://www.ampainsoc.org/pub/principles.htm. Acute Pain Management Guideline Panel. Acute pain management: Operative or Medical Procedures and Trauma Clinical Practice Guideline. AHCPR Publication No. 92-0032. Available at: http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/books/bv.fcgi?rid=hstat6.chapter.32241. Management of Cancer Pain. Clinical Practice Guideline No. 9; AHCPR Publication No. 94-0592.Rockville, MD. Agency for Health Care Policy and Research, US Department of Health and Human Services, Public Health Service; 1992, 1994. Available at: http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/books/bv.fcgi?rid=hstat6.chapter.18803. ACGME Competencies: Medical Knowledge, Patient Care Keyword(s): Pain – Opioids 
#073 Amyotrophic Lateral Sclerosist (ALS) Management of Respiratory Failure, 2nd ed Author(s): Ajmal Gilani MD, Albert Hinn MD, Peter Lars Jacobson MD Background Respiratory failure is the most common cause of death from amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS). Except for rare patients who present with respiratory failure, respiratory muscle weakness develops insidiously during the course of the disease. This allows most patients, families, and clinicians time to carefully discuss the options for ventilatory support before such decisions needs to be made. Options for ventilatory support should be discussed long before the development of respiratory insufficiency. In addition, patients should be encouraged to identify a power of attorney for health care/healthcare proxy and to discuss their preferences about ventilatory support early in the course of the illness. Assessment of Respiratory Insufficiency Early signs and symptoms of respiratory muscle weakness are subtle: dyspnea with mild exertion, supine dyspnea, insomnia, morning headache, reduced appetite, weight loss, dizziness, depression, anxiety and marked fatigue. There are no standard protocols to detect early respiratory failure. The following tests may be helpful: Maximal Inspiratory Pressure (MIP) has been reported to be the single most sensitive test. Measuring the change from erect to supine sitting Vital Capacity (VC) can detect early diaphragmatic weakness and can be used to monitor declining respiratory function. Diaphragm weakness is suggested by a greater than 25% fall in VC on assuming a supine position. A normal supine VC makes significant inspiratory muscle weakness unlikely. A VC less than 1L or less than 30% of predicted value indicates significant risk of respiratory failure and death. Nocturnal oximetry is useful in evaluating nocturnal hypoventilation; a full polysomnogram can be an alternative test. Choices for Respiratory Management Bi-level Positive Airway Pressure (BiPAP), a type of non-invasive ventilation, can improve symptoms of hypoventilation, quality of life, and survival by several months. Some patients, particularly those with bulbar involvement and difficulty in clearing secretions, cannot tolerate BiPAP. The use of oxygen at night without ventilatory assistance is not sufficient; patients with oxygen desaturation and chronic hypercapnia require nocturnal BiPAP ventilation to avoid suppression of respiratory drive during sleep. During the day BiPAP can be used to alleviate respiratory muscle fatigue. The use of ‘intermittent positive pressure’ breathing machines has been reported to expand the lungs and reduce atelectasis. Full-time invasive ventilatory support is sometimes considered when non-invasive ventilation is no longer effective or tolerable. Treating reversible problems (e.g. acute respiratory infection) is important to avoid the need for invasive long-term ventilation with a tracheostomy. Most patients who select a ventilator become completely dependent on it and are unable to communicate verbally. Many patients will choose not to be ventilated if comfort is assured and adequate advance care planning occurs. Supportive Care Regardless of assisted ventilatory choices, compassionate and effective palliative care must be implemented. A calm environment, the reassuring presence of relatives, trunk elevation and chest physiotherapy may all provide relief. The sensation of shortness of breathing can be reduced by morphine (2.5-10 mg by mouth or 1-2 mg IV/subcutaneous every 1-4 hours). Titration of the morphine dose against the clinical effect almost never leads to a life threatening respiratory depression (see Fast Fact #27 ). Anxiety due to respiratory insufficiency can be treated with lorazepam (0.5-1.0 mg sublingually). When co-morbid medical complications develop, or patient determined quality of life deteriorates, ventilator support can be withdrawn and symptom control provided to allow for a comfortable death. See Fast Facts #33 , 34 , 35 about ventilator withdrawal. References Bosario GD, Voltz R, Miller RG. Palliative care in amyotrophic lateral sclerosis. Neurologic Clinics. 2001; 19(4):801-827. Bradley WG, Daroff RB, et al. Neurology in Clinical Practice. Woburn, MA: Butterworth-Heinemann; 2000: pp2005-2014. Beach JR. Amyotrophic lateral sclerosis: predictors for prolongation of life by non-invasive respiratory aids. Archives of Physical Medicine and Rehabilitation. 1995; 76(9):828-32. Pinto AC, Evangelista T, Carvalho M. Respiratory assistance with a non-invasive ventilator (Bipap) in MND/ALS patients. J Neurological Sciences. 1995; 129(Suppl):S19-26. Howard RS, Wiles CM, Loh L. Respiratory complications and their management in motor neuron disease. Brain. 1989; 112(5):1155-70. Oliver D, Borasio GD, Walsh D. Palliative Care in Amyotrophic Lateral Sclerosis. New York, NY: Oxford University Press; 2000. Voltz R, Bernat JL, Borasio GD, Maddocks I, Oliver D, Portenoy RK. Palliative Care in Neurology. New York, NY: Oxford University Press; 2004: pp79-89. ACGME Competencies: Medical Knowledge, Patient Care Keyword(s): Pain – Opioids 
#074 Oral Opioid Orders - Good and Bad Examples, 2nd ed Author(s): David E Weissman MD Introduction This Fast Fact will illustrate poorly written opioid orders and provide preferred alternatives. Scenario 1: Episodic (non-continuous) moderate-to-severe pain Bad Example: ‘Oxycodone w/ acetaminophen (Percocet), 1-2 PO q 4-6hour PRN severe pain, and acetaminophen w/codeine (Tylenol #3) 1-2 PO q4-6 PRN moderate pain.’ Discussion This order has several problems. The duration of short-acting opioids is typically 3-4 hours - rarely 6 hours. Studies document that when given a range, nurses and doctors are most likely to give the lowest dose at the longest interval, leading to inadequate analgesia. Only one opioids/non-opioid combination should be prescribed at a time: assess for response and change to different product if the first agent does not produce the desired effect. The use of descriptors (‘mild,’ ‘moderate,’ ‘severe’) allows for subjective interpretation of pain severity by the nurse, rather than judging pain severity directly based on patient report. There is a very poor correlation of pain ratings between patients and clinicians. Should both drugs be used, there is risk of exceeding 4 grams/day of acetaminophen. Preferred order ‘Oxycodone w/ acetaminophen, 1-2 tabs PO q 4 hours PRN pain.’ Scenario 2: Order for an oral long-acting opioid Bad Example ‘Morphine extended-release 60 mg q 6 hours and transdermal fentanyl patch 25 mcg/hour, changed q 72 hours.’ Discussion This order has two problems. First, none of the oral long-acting products (e.g. MS Contin, Oxycontin, Kadian) should be prescribed less than Q8h; Q12 is the preferred dosing interval. Second, there is no rationale for using two different long-acting products at the same time. Prescribe only one drug, then dose escalate to desired effect or unacceptable toxicity. Remember to always prescribe a PRN product for breakthrough pain. While the oral long-acting products can be dose escalated every 24 hours, the transdermal fentanyl patch can only be safely dose escalated every 2-3 days. Thus, it is a poor choice for poorly controlled pain Preferred order ‘Morphine extended-release 150 mg q 12 hours.’ (The dose of 150 mg q12 hours is derived from the following equianalgesic relationships: morphine 60 mg q6 hours is 240 mg/day; transdermal fentanyl 25mcg/hr = approximately 60 mg/day of oral morphine. 240 + 60 = 300 mg or 150 mg q12 hours. See Fast Fact #2 .) References Acute Pain Management Guideline Panel. Acute pain management: Operative or Medical Procedures and Trauma Clinical Practice Guideline. AHCPR Publication No. 92-0032. Available at: http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/books/bv.fcgi?rid=hstat6.chapter.32241. Management of Cancer Pain. Clinical Practice Guideline No. 9; AHCPR Publication No. 94-0592.Rockville, MD. Agency for Health Care Policy and Research, US Department of Health and Human Services, Public Health Service; 1992, 1994. Available at: http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/books/bv.fcgi?rid=hstat6.chapter.18803. Drayer RA, et al. Barriers to better pain control in hospitalized patients. J Pain Sym Manage. 1999; 17:434-440. Friedman FB. PRN analgesics: controlling the pain or controlling the patient? RN. 1983; 43:67-78. Principles of Analgesic Use in the Treatment of Acute and Cancer Pain. 5th Ed. Glenview, IL: American Pain Society; 2003. Available at: http://www.ampainsoc.org/pub/principles.htm . ACGME Competencies: Medical Knowledge, Patient Care Keyword(s): Pain – Opioids 
#075 Methadone for the Treatment of Pain, 2nd ed Author(s): Gail Gazelle MD and Perry G Fine MD Introduction Methadone, a potent opioid agonist, has many characteristics that make it useful for the treatment of pain when continuous opioid analgesia is indicated. Although available for decades, its use has gained renewed interest due to its low cost and potential activity in neuropathic pain syndromes. This Fast Fact will introduce methadone’s pharmacology and clinical use as an analgesic. Pharmacology Unlike morphine, methadone is a racemic mix; one stereoisomer acts as a NMDA receptor antagonist, the other is a mu-opioid receptor agonist. The NMDA mechanism plays an important role in the prevention of opioid tolerance, potentiation of opioid effects, and efficacy for neuropathic pain syndromes, although this latter impression is largely anecdotal. Methadone is highly lipophilic with rapid GI absorption and onset of action. It has a large initial volume of distribution with slow tissue release. Oral bioavailability is high, ~ 80%. Unlike morphine there are no active metabolites and biotransformation to an active drug is not required. The major route of metabolism is hepatic with significant fecal excretion; renal excretion can be enhanced by urine acidification (pH <6.0). Unlike morphine, no dose adjustment is needed in patients with renal failure since there are no active metabolites. Prescribing Methadone is available in tablet, liquid and injectable forms; oral preparations can be used rectally. Parenteral routes include IV bolus dosing or continuous infusion. Any clinician with a Schedule II DEA license can prescribe methadone for pain; a special license is only required to prescribe methadone for the treatment of addiction. In some jurisdictions, it is necessary to apply the words “for pain” on the prescription. Cautions Unlike morphine, hydromorphone, or oxycodone, methadone has an extended terminal half-life of up to 190 hours. This half-life does not match the observed duration of analgesia (6-12 hours) after steady state is reached. This long half-life can lead to increased risk for sedation and respiratory depression, especially in the elderly or with rapid dose adjustments. Rapid titration guidelines for other opioids do not apply to methadone. Given recent reports that high-dose methadone may be associated with development of QT interval prolongation and Torsades de Pointes, EKG monitoring may be appropriate when changes in dosage are made (depending upon life expectancy and goals of care). Potency An important property of methadone is that its apparent potency, compared to other opioids, varies with the patient’s current exposure to other opioids. See below for a suggested dosing guide for opioids tolerant patients (Reference 1). Daily oral morphine dose equivalents Conversion ratio of oral morphine to oral methadone <100 mg 3:1 (i.e. 3 mg morphine = 1 mg methadone) 101-300 mg 5:1 301-600 10:1 601-800 mg 12:1 801-1000 mg 15:1 >1001 mg 20:1 Due to incomplete cross-tolerance, it is recommended that the initial dose is 50-75% of the equianalgesic dose. Key Points Compared to morphine, methadone is inexpensive, may provide improved analgesia in neuropathic pain and will provide a longer duration of action. Dosing intervals at the start of treatment are q 4-6 hours, and may increase over time to q 6-12 hours. Methadone is not indicated in poorly controlled pain where rapid dose adjustments are needed; do not increase oral methadone more frequently than every 4 days. Dose conversion to:from other opioids and methadone is complex; consultation with pain or palliative specialists familiar with methadone use is recommended• Patient and family education is essential as they may misinterpret prescription of methadone to mean that their physician believes that they are an addict. References Ayonrinde OT, Bridge DT. The rediscovery of methadone for cancer pain management. Med J Austral. 2000; 173:536-40. Bruera E, Sweeney C. Methadone use in cancer patients with pain: a review. J Pall Med. 2002; 5(1):127-38. Iribarne C, Dreano Y, Bardou LG, et al. Interaction of methadone with substrates of human hepatic cytochrome P450 3A4. Toxicology. 1997; 117:13-23 Krantz MJ, Lewkowiez L, Hays H, et al. Torsade de Pointes associated with very-high-dose methadone. Ann Intern Med. 2002; 137:501-4. Morley JS, Makin MK. The use of methadone in cancer pain poorly responsive to other opioids. Pain Rev. 1998; 5:51-8. Rowbotham MC. The debate over opioids and neuropathic pain. In: Kalso E, McQuay HJ, Wiesenfeld-Hallin Z, eds. Opioid Sensitivity of Chronic Noncancer Pain. (Progress in Pain Research and Management, Vol 14). Seattle, WA: IASP Press; 1999: pp 307-317. ACGME Competencies: Medical Knowledge, Patient Care Keyword(s): Pain – Opioids 
#076 Telephone Notification of Death - Part 1, 2nd ed Author(s): Rosalia R Osias MD, Daniel H Pomerantz MD, Jeffrey M Brensilver MD, FACP Background Telephone notification to family members about a death is one of the most challenging and stressful communication skills, especially for cross-covering housestaff who may have had no direct interactions with the patient or family. Unpredictable variables are involved; telephone notification does not allow the same level of interaction possible with direct personal contact. This Fast Fact offers some guidelines when telephone notification is unavoidable; Fast Fact #77 discusses issues surrounding whether or not to delay notification of death until loved ones arrive at the hospital. Preparing for the Call Review death pronouncement protocol (See Fast Facts#4 and 64 ). Positively identify the patient (hospital ID tag) and confirm death. Obtain relevant information; e.g. patient's name, age, gender, identification numbers. Obtain the full name, address, phone number(s) of the person/s you are calling. Try to establish from the chart and nursing staff the relationship of the contact to the deceased patient. Establish the circumstances of death; expected or sudden. Write down the key information you need and thoroughly review what you will say. Find a quiet or private area with a phone. Timing The call should be made as soon as possible following the death. Whenever possible, inform the family of a grave turn of events prior to the patient dying. When substantial delay is likely, the responsibility for informing the family should be taken by the covering doctor (or the resident). The Actual Notification Identify yourself. Ask the identity of the person you are talking to and their relationship to the patient. Ask to speak to the person closest to the patient (ideally, the health care proxy or the contact person indicated in the chart). Avoid responding to any direct question until you have verified the identity of the person to whom you are speaking. Ask if the contact person is alone. Do not give death notification to minor children. If you do not have a prior relationship with the person you are speaking to, ask what they know about the patient’s condition: What have the doctors told you about _____’s condition? Provide a warning shot: I’m afraid I have some bad news. Use clear and direct language, no medical jargon: I’m sorry, _____ has just died. Words like 'dead' or 'died' should be used. “Expired”, “passed away” or 'didn't make it' can be misinterpreted. Speak clearly and slowly, allow time for questions. Be empathetic. A perceptive family can easily tell whether the notifier cares or is merely 'going through the motions.” If the family chooses to come to see the body, arrange to meet them personally. Provide contact information for the physician or hospital official who can meet with them and answer questions about the patient's death and other administrative issues. Ask if you can contact anyone for them. Assess their emotional reaction (see Fast Fact #77 ). If you feel uncomfortable about telephone notification, ask for help. Never deliver the news of death to an answering machine or voice mail. Instead, leave specific contact information. If you are unable to make contact within 1-2 hours, contact a hospital representative (e.g. social worker) to assist you in locating family or others. References Iserson KV. The gravest words: sudden-death notification and emergency care. Ann Emerg Med. 2000; 36:75-77. Iserson KV. The gravest words: notifying survivors about sudden, unexpected deaths. Resident and Staff Physician. 2001; 47:66-72. ACGME Competencies: Interpersonal and Communication Skills, Patient Care Keyword(s): Communication 
#077 Telephone Notification of Death - Part 2, 2nd ed Author(s): Rosalia R Osias MD, Daniel H Pomerantz MD, Jeffrey M Brensilver MD, FACP Introduction In Part I ( Fast Fact#76 ), the basic steps and precautions of telephone notication of death were outlined. This Fast Fact discusses the dilemma of whether to provide telephone information versus asking family members to first come to hospital before telling them that death has occurred. Delay vs. Disclose Immediately Few would disagree that it is always preferable to present death notification in person. However, when families live at a great distance, or are physically unable to travel, telephone discussion will be necessary. In other situations, clinicians must weigh the benefits of truthfulness against the risk of potential harm resulting from abrupt disclosure of the bad news. Factors to consider in making this decision include: Whether death was expected or not, including the nature and chronicity of the illness. How well the death notifier knows the patient and the patient’s family. The relationship of the contact person to the patient. The anticipated emotional reaction of the contact person based on prior information. Whether the contact person will be alone when receiving the information The contact person's level of understanding. Distance, availability of transport, and time of day. For example, when death is expected due to progressive cancer and the notifier knows both the patient and the contact person, telephone notification is very acceptable. In fact, you should have prepared for this moment ahead of time by asking the contact how he or she wishes to be contacted at the time of death. In contrast, if the death is sudden, especially of a minor, notification in person is always preferred, although time and distance issues may make this impractical. The notifier must be prepared to quickly integrate all these factors to decide whether to reveal that the patient is dead, or whether to describe the patient as gravely ill and request that the contact person come to the hospital immediately. If you decide to delay disclosure of the death, be prepared to make immediate admission of such nondisclosure as soon as you meet the family (e.g. I'm sorry for not telling you the whole thing right away over the phone; then give your reason for doing so). Responding to Emotions Whether in person or by telephone, you should expect an emotional reaction to the death notification (see Fast Fact #29 ). Responding to emotions via telephone is especially difficult. Some tips include: Ensure that the contact has someone else with them. Offer to contact family members, friends, clergy or others. Offer to meet with the contact in person. Contact your hospital social worker for advice on contacting other local resources such as the Red Cross, local police, or other service agencies. References Iserson KV. The gravest words: sudden-death notification and emergency care. Ann Emerg Med. 2000; 36:75-77. Iserson KV. The gravest words: notifying survivors about sudden, unexpected deaths. Resident and Staff Physician. 2001; 47:66-72. ACGME Competencies: Interpersonal and Communication Skills, Patient Care Keyword(s): Communication 
#078 Cultural Aspects of Pain Management, 2nd ed Author(s): Debra Gordon RN, MS, FAAN and Shiva Bidar-Sielaff Introduction Culture is the framework that directs human behavior in a given situation. The meaning and expression of pain are influenced by people’s cultural background. Pain is not just a physiologic response to tissue damage but also includes emotional and behavioral responses based on an individual’s past experiences and perceptions of pain. Not everyone in every culture conforms to a set of expected behaviors or beliefs, so cultural stereotyping (assuming a person will be stoic or very expressive about pain) can lead to inadequate assessment and treatment of pain. Many studies have shown that patients from minority groups and cultures different from that of health care professionals treating them receive inadequate pain management. ‘Cultural Competence’ Health care professionals need to be aware of their own values and perceptions as they affect how they evaluate the patient’s response to pain and ultimately how pain is treated. Even subtle cultural and individual differences, particularly in nonverbal, spoken, and written language between health care providers and patients impact care. To be culturally competent , you must: Be aware of your own cultural and family values Be aware of your personal biases and assumptions about people with different values than yours Be aware and accept cultural differences between yourself and individual patients Understand the dynamics of the difference Adapt to, and respect, diversity You must Listen with empathy to the patient’s perception of their pain, Explain your perception of the pain problem, Acknowledge the differences and similarities in perceptions, Recommend treatment, and Negotiate agreement . Questions that staff can use to help assess cultural differences in order to better assess and work out an appropriate pain management plan with a patient and family include: What do you call your pain? Do you have a name for it? What do you think caused your [pain]? Why do you think it started when it did? What does your [pain] do to you? How does it work? How severe is your pain? Will it have a long or short course? What are the most important results you hope to receive from the treatment? What are the main problems your [pain] has caused you? What do you fear most about your [pain]? See Fast Facts #17 , 216 for further discussions about assessing cultural and individual understanding of illness. This Fast Fact was adapted with permission from the University of Wisconsin Hospital & Clinics, Madison, WI Pain Patient Care Team ‘Pain Management Fast Facts – 5 Minute Inservice’ series . References Anderson KO, et al. Pain education for underserved minority cancer patients: a randomized controlled trial. J Clin Oncol. 2004; 22(24):4918-4925. Davidhizar R, Giger JN. A review of the literature on care of clients in pain who are culturally diverse. Intl Nurs Review . 2004; 51(1):47-55. Bates MS, Rankin-Hill L, Sanchez-Ayendez M. The effects of the cultural context of health care on treatment of and response to chronic pain and illness. Soc Sci Med. 1997; 45(9):1433-1447. Kleinman A, Eisenberg L, Good B. Culture, illness, and care. Clinical lesions from anthropologic and cross-cultural research. Ann Int Med. 1978; 88:251-8. ACGME Competencies: Interpersonal and Communication Skills, Patient Care Keyword(s): Communication; Pain – Evaluation 
#079 Discussing Organ Donation with Families, 2nd ed Author(s): Robert Arnold MD Background Organ transplantation is one of critical care medicine’s modern success stories. Unfortunately, the success of organ transplantation has not been matched by organ procurement. One reason is surely the problems faced by health care providers who spend most of their time caring for the living and are often ill-prepared to deal with the procurement process. The purpose of this Fast Fact is to review the issues surrounding organ, tissue, and cornea donation. Who is eligible? To avoid mistakes in identification, current Federal legislation requires that health care professionals notify Organ Procurement Organizations (OPO) of all impending deaths. It is important that this happen early in the process, prior to medical decisions that might result in not being able to use the organs. Who should talk to the family? Recent studies and best practice suggest that OPO staff should approach the family together with the health care team. Physicians approaching families independently are associated with the lowest rate of consent. The law currently requires that only health care providers who have gone through specific training approach the family about organ donation. There are some data to suggest that it is important that requesters be of the same ethnicity as the family. When should the issue of organ donation be discussed? This is controversial, although most agree that the issue should not be discussed prior the family coming to the realization that their loved one is not going to live. There is a belief that one should 'decouple' discussion of brain death and the request for organ donation, but this has not been found to make a difference in empirical studies. What is the role of organ donation cards? Organ donor cards (e.g. back of a driver’s license) are legally binding. Thus, if the patient filled out an organ donor card, the family should not be asked about donation, but told that their loved one wanted to donate. Who agrees to donate? African Americans are less likely to donate and have more negative attitudes regarding organ donation, although this has changed over the last ten years because of intensive public education. More disturbingly, data suggest that health care providers are less likely to talk to African Americans about organ donation and talk differently than when whites are approached. Age, socio-economic status and education also seem correlated with consent rates. However, the most important determinant of consent is the family's knowledge regarding the patient's pre-morbid views about donation. What communication processes correlate with donation? Three things seem important: Discussing specific topics about donation. Particularly important is information about issues of concern such as misconceptions about donation's effect on funerals and cost. Allowing the family to spend more time with the OPO staff. In a very large study, families’ major request was to spend more time with OPO staff, stressing that health care professionals need to involve OPO staff early in the decision-making. Psychosocial support for the grieving family. References Arnold RM, Siminoff LM, et al. Ethical issues in organ procurement: a review for intensivists. Crit Care Clinics. 1996; 12(1):29-48. Siminoff LA, Arnold RM, et al. Public policy governing organ and tissue procurement in the United States: results from the national organ and tissue study. Ann Int Med. 1995; 123(1):10-17. Siminoff LA, Gordon N, Hewlett J, Arnold RM. Factors influencing families' consent for donation of solid organs for transplantation. JAMA. 2001; 286:71-77. ACGME Competencies: Interpersonal and Communication Skills, Patient Care Keyword(s): Communication; Ethics, Law, Policy Health Systems 
#080 Controlled Release Oxycondone, 2nd ed Author(s): David E Weissman MD Background Controlled release oxycodone (CRO) has received considerable attention in the lay press over the past several years. Much of the coverage has been negative, related to the illicit use of CRO due to diversion outside of legitimate medical practice. Within legitimate medical practice, CRO is an effective long-acting oral opioid product, very similar to controlled release morphine. This Fast Fact reviews CRO usage in palliative care. Indication CRO is indicated for moderate to severe pain requiring continuous, around-the-clock analgesia for an extended period of time. Pharmacology Oxycodone is a semi-synthetic opioid that interacts with both mu- and kappa-opioid receptors, but behaves in most respects identically to morphine. CRO has greater oral bioavailability than morphine, and a bi-phasic absorption pattern, with peaks at 37 minutes and 6.2 hours. Peak pain relief occurs in one hour. Unlike morphine, oxycodone has minimally active metabolites, demonstrating little to no analgesic or anti-analgesic properties. Oxycodone should be used with caution in patients with renal and liver impairment and avoided in hemodialysis patients. CRO can lead to all the traditional opioid side effects. Anecdotal reports suggest less nausea, hallucinosis, and nausea compared to morphine, although these observations have not been substantiated in controlled trials. Equianalgesic Information Studies comparing round the clock immediate-release oxycodone to controlled-release oxycodone products demonstrate equivalent results. The conversion factor between morphine and oxycodone has been controversial, but the most commonly accepted data suggests that 30 mg of morphine is equivalent to 20 mg of oxycodone. Since all equianalgesic values are rough guidelines, prescribers need to use their clinical judgment in determining the most appropriate starting dose (see Fast Fact #36 ). Dosage The starting dose of CRO in an opioid naïve patient is 10 mg q12 hours; it can be dose escalated every 24-48 hours (see Fast Fact #20 ). CRO must be taken intact; pills cannot be cut or crushed without risk of rapid absorption and subsequent overdose. CRO is not approved for rectal administration. Cost CRO is more expensive than generic long-acting morphine; there is currently no generic CRO product on the market. Diversion CRO has been associated with greater diversion to the illicit drug market than morphine. Illicit users will commonly crush the tablet and then chew, snort, or dissolve the product in water for intravenous injection. CRO can bring $1-per-milligram or more on the illicit market. Summary CRO oxycodone is an effective long-acting oral opioid. Due to cost and concerns about diversion, controlled release morphine is the drug of first choice for a long-acting oral opioid product. There are no data that CRO offers any analgesic benefit compared to morphine. References Kral LA. Commonsense oxycodone prescribing and safety. Pain Treatment Topics. June 2007. Available at: http://www.pain-topics.org/opioid_rx/oxycodone.php#OxyRx. Accessed August 27, 2007. Mucci-LoRusso P, Berman BS, Silberstein PT, et al. Controlled-release oxycodone compared with controlled-release morphine in the treatment of cancer pain: a randomized, double-blind, parallel-group study. Eur J Pain. 1998; 2:239-249. Principles of analgesic use in the treatment of acute pain and cancer pain. Glenview, IL: American Pain Society 5th Ed; 2003. Foral PA, Ineck JR, Nystrom KK. Oxycodone accumulation in a hemodialysis patient. South Med J. 2007; 100:212-214. Rischitelli DG, Karbowicz SH. Safety and efficacy of controlled-release oxycodone: a systemic literature review. Pharmacotherapy. 2002; 22:898-904 SAMHSA (Substance Abuse and Mental Health Services Administration). Results from the 2005 National Survey on Drug Use and Health: National Findings. Available at: http://www.oas.samhsa.gov/nsduh/2k5nsduh/2k5Results.htm. Accessed August 27, 2007. Criteria for Use of Controlled-release Oxycodone: Treatment Algorithm. Veteran Affairs Pharmacy Benefits Management. August 2003. Available at: http://www.pbm.va.gov/Clinical%20Guidance/Criteria%20For%20Use/Oxycodone%20CR,%20Criteria%20for%20Use%20and%20Treatment%20Algorithm.htm. ACGME Competencies: Medical Knowledge, Patient Care Keyword(s): Pain – Opioids 
#081 Management of Hiccups, 2nd ed Author(s): Chad Farmer MD Background Hiccups (singultus) are distressing to patients and families; when chronic, they diminish quality of life. A hiccup is an involuntary reflex involving the respiratory muscles of the chest and diaphragm, mediated by the phrenic and vagus nerves and a central (brainstem) reflex center. A single episode can last for a few seconds to as long as several days. If they last longer than 48 hours hiccups are termed persistent; longer than one month, intractable. Etiologies range from stress/excitement to cancer, myocardial infarction, esophageal or gastric distension, liver disease, uremia, IV steroids, CNS lesions, and idiopathic. Irritation of the vagus nerve or diaphragm is a common pathophysiologic mechanism. Management Once hiccups have lasted beyond a time-limited annoyance, deciding on therapeutic intervention should be based on a thorough clinical assessment and, if possible, treatment directed at the underlying cause. A thorough history, review of medications, focused review of systems, and physical exam may help guide initial choice of treatment. Many drug and non-drug treatments have been used, but there is little evidence of any one superior approach to management; virtually all current data are anecdotal. The patient’s prognosis, current level of function, and potential adverse effects from any proposed treatment should be considered. Pharmacologic Therapy Anti-Psychotics: Chlorpromazine – the only FDA approved drug for hiccups. Dose: 25-50 mg PO TID or QID. Can also be given by slow IV infusion (25-50 mg in 500-1000 ml of NS over several hours). Haloperidol – a useful alternative to chlorpromazine; give a 2-5 mg (SubQ/PO) loading dose followed by 1-4 mg PO TID. Anti-Convulsants: Gabapentin – at doses of 300-400 TID has been described as effective in multiple case reports. Phenytoin – reportedly effective in patients with a CNS etiology of their hiccups. Dose: 200 mg slow IV push followed by 300 mg PO daily. Others: Valproic Acid and Carbamazepine have been reported to work for selected patients. Miscellaneous: Baclofen – the only drug studied in a double blind randomized controlled study for treatment of hiccups. 5 mg PO q8 hours did not eliminate hiccups but did provide symptomatic relief in some patients. Metoclopramide – 10 mg PO QID is an option, especially if stomach distension is the etiology. Nifedipine – 10 mg BID with gradual increase up to 20 mg TID has been suggested as a relatively safe alternative if other interventions have failed. Other drugs that have been tried with very limited success include: amitriptyline, sertraline, inhaled lidocaine, ketamine, edrophonium, and amantidine. Non-Pharmacologic Therapy There are many well known, time-honored home remedies: gargling with water, biting a lemon, swallowing sugar, or producing a fright response. Other approaches are directed at a) vagal stimulation such as carotid massage or valsalva maneuver; b) interruption of phrenic nerve transmission via rubbing over the 5th cervical vertebrae; or c) interrupting the respiratory cycle through sneezing, coughing, breath holding, hyperventilation, or breathing into a paper bag. Other interventions such as acupuncture, diaphragmatic pacing electrodes, or surgical ablation of the reflex arc can be considered when other treatments fail. References Kolodzik PW, Eilers, MA. Hiccups (singultus): review and approach to management. Ann Emerg Med. 1991; 20:565-573. Lewis J. Hiccups: causes and cures. J Clin Gastro. 1985; 7:539-552. Rousseau, P. Hiccups. Southern Med J. 1995; 2:175-181. Bondi N, Bettelli, A. Treatment of hiccup by acupuncture in patients under anesthesia and in conscious patients. Minerva Med. 1981; 72:2231-2234. Ramirez FC, Graham DY. Treatment of intractable hiccup with baclofen: results of a double-blind, randomized, controlled, cross-over study. A J Gastro. 1992; 87:1789-91. Physicians’ Desk Reference. 61st Edition. Thomson PDR; 2007. Available at http://pdr.net . Smith HS, Busracamwongs A. Management of hiccups in the palliative care population. Am J Hosp Pall Care. 2003; 20:149-54. Vaidya V. Sertraline in the treatment of hiccups. Psychosomat. 2000; 41:353-355. Hernandez JL, et al. Gabapentin for intractable hiccup. Am J Med. 2004; 117:279-81. ACGME Competencies: Medical Knowledge, Patient Care Keyword(s): Non-Pain Symptoms and Syndromes 
#082 Medicare Hospice Benefit: Part 1 Eligibility and Treatment Plan, 2nd ed Author(s): Robin Turner MD and Drew A Rosielle MD Background In the United States, the Medicare Hospice Benefit (MHB) pays for 80% of all hospice care. Established in 1983, the MHB pays for medical, nursing, counseling, and bereavement services to terminally ill patients and their families. The original goal of the MHB was to support families caring for a dying relative at home. Under certain circumstances, hospice services under the MHB can also be provided in a nursing home or the acute care hospital. Referral for hospice care is appropriate when the overall plan of care is directed toward comfort rather than reversing the underlying disease process. Fast Facts #87 , 90 , and 140 further discuss the MHB. Eligibility—Medicare Hospice Benefit The patient must be entitled to Medicare Part A (hospital payments); once the patient decides to enter hospice care, they sign off Part A and sign on (elect) the MHB. Note: this process is reversible—patients may at a future time elect to return to Medicare Part A. The patient must be certified by the Hospice Medical Director and primary physician to have a life expectancy < 6 months “if the patient's disease runs its natural course.” Patients can continue to be eligible if they live beyond 6 months as long as the physicians believe death is likely within 6 months. Under the MHB, DNR status cannot be used as a requirement for admission. Covered Services (100% coverage with no co-pay) Case oversight by the physician Hospice Medical Director Nursing care: symptom assessment, skilled services/treatments and case management. The nurse visits routinely; 24-hour/7-day per week emergency contact is also provided. Social work: counseling and planning (living will, DPOA). Counseling services including chaplaincy. All medications and supplies related to the terminal illness. The hospice cab charge a $5 copay per medication, but most choose not to charge this. Medications for conditions not related to the terminal condition are not covered. Durable medical equipment: hospital bed, commode, wheelchair, etc. Home health aid and homemaker services. Speech, nutrition, physical, and occupational therapy services as determined by the plan of care (see below). Bereavement support to the family after the death of the patient. Short term General Inpatient Care for problems that cannot be managed at home—most commonly intractable pain, delirium, or caregiver breakdown. Short term Respite Care—up to 5 days to permit family caregivers to take a break. Continuous care at home for short episodes of acute need. Not Covered Continuous nursing assistance (i.e. extended supervisory care) or nursing home room and board charges. Plan of Care (POC) The hospice team and the patient’s physician work together to maximize quality of life by jointly developing the Plan of Care. The POC is based on the patient's diagnosis, symptoms, and other needs. The hospice program and the patient’s physician must together approve any proposed tests, treatments, and services. In general, only those treatments that are necessary for palliation and/or management of the terminal illness will be approved. Physician Role At the time of enrollment the patient indicates the primary physician who will direct care; the patient may select a hospice physician for this role or may select their usual primary doctor. The primary physician is responsible for working with the hospice team to determine appropriate care. Non-Medicare Hospice Plans Medicaid hospice benefits closely mirror the MHB. Private insurance plans generally emulate the MHB but occasionally depart from it dramatically (e.g. capping the total number of days a patient may receive hospice care). References The Hospice Manual. Centers for Medicare & Medicaid Services. Available at: http://www.cms.hhs.gov/manuals/downloads/pub_21.zip. Accessed November 1, 2007. Herbst L. Hospice care at the end of life. Clin Geriatr Med. 2004; 20: 753-65. Gazelle G. Understanding hospice – an underutilized option for life’s final chapter. NEJM. 2007; 357: 321-324. ACGME Competencies: Systems-Based Practice Keyword(s): Ethics, Law, Policy Health Systems 
#083 Why Patients Do Not Take Their Opioids, 2nd ed Author(s): Robert Arnold MD Introduction Patients have many of the same misconceptions regarding opioids that health care providers have. This Fast Fact discusses common reasons that patients do not take prescribed opioids, thus resulting in unnecessary pain and suffering. Fear of Addiction Patients are very afraid of “becoming hooked”; they confuse physical dependence with psychological dependence (addiction). The recent increase in OxyContin abuse (see Fast Fact #80 ) and the resulting publicity may increase these fears. Patients may refer to the media (”I don’t want that drug that was in Newsweek”) or familial experience (“My cousin was addicted to OxyContin”). As a result, patients try to limit their intake and often wait until the pain is severe before using opioids. Fear of Tolerance Patients often worry about taking pain medicine “too early” in their disease course. They believe that if the pain gets worse they will have already taken the “best” medicine and thus have severe pain during the dying process. A related belief is that if they take the medicine on a regular basis, their body will “get used to it” and thus the pain medicine will no longer be effective. Opioid Toxicity Patients are concerned about opioid side effects, especially mental impairment, nausea, and constipation. Pain as a Symptom Patients may believe that treating the symptom rather than the cause of the pain (e.g. cancer) is a bad idea. They worry that this may mask the disease’s progression so that future medical decisions are not made in a timely manner. The Good Patient Patients frequently don’t want to ‘worry’ the doctor or ‘bother’ him or her with complaints. Particularly with pain, they may feel their report of pain is a criticism. Patients may believe that “good” patients do not complain about pain or ask for more medicine. Our society traditionally has had a very ambivalent view towards pain and pain treatment, believing that it is better if patients are “strong,” minimizing their symptoms (see Fast Fact #78 ). The Meaning of Pain Patients may view their pain as a punishment for past bad deeds, or view the pain experience as an opportunity for growth or personal redemption. When present, such beliefs lead patients not to discuss their pain with their health care team and to defer using analgesics. Patient Assessment Tips Patients want to please their doctor, thus asking, “Are you taking your medicine?” is likely to result in the patient saying “Yes.” To better understand the patient’s beliefs regarding pain medicine and how they are taking their medicine one should: Use non-judgmental phrasing. “Tell me exactly how you take your pain medicine.” Often it is easier for patients to tell you that they are not taking the medicine the way they were prescribed if you acknowledge how hard it is to take the medicine; “It must be really hard to take all these pills. How often, in the last week, have you found that you forget one or two?” Normalize the patient’s concerns. “Some patients worry that if they take the pain medications, they will become addicted. Do you have this worry?” Explicitly ask about their health beliefs regarding opioids. Ask what they know about morphine or whether they have any family members who have taken morphine and what the experience was like. Ask about side effects at every visit in the same way that you ask about pain. Moreover, ask about whether the patient notices any other changes that s/he believes might be caused by the opioids. Proactively prepare patients about side effects that are transient or treatable such as sedation, nausea, and constipation. References Cleeland CS. Clinical cancer: 31. Barriers to the management of cancer pain: the roles of patient and family. Wis Med J. 1988; 87(11):13-15. Ersek M. Enhancing effective pain management by addressing patient barriers to analgesic use. J Hospice Pall Nursing. 1990; 1(3):87-96. Ward SE, Goldberg N, et al. Patient-related barriers to management of cancer pain. Pain. 1993; 52(3):319-24. Gunnarsdottir S, et al. Patient-related barriers to pain management: The barriers questionnaire II (BQ-II). Pain. 2002; 99:385-396. ACGME Competencies: Interpersonal and Communication Skills, Medical Knowledge, Patient Care Keyword(s): Pain – Evaluation; Pain – Opioids 
#084 Swallow Studies, Tube Feeding and the Death Spiral, 2nd ed Author(s): David E Weissman MD Introduction The reflex by families and doctors to provide nutrition for the patient who cannot swallow is overwhelming. It is now common practice for such patients to undergo a swallowing evaluation and if there is significant impairment to move forward with feeding tube placement (either nasogastric or gastrostomy) – see Fast Fact #128 . Data suggest that in-hospital mortality for hospitalizations in which a feeding tube is places is 15-25%, and one year mortality after feeding tube placement is 60%. Predictors of early mortality include: advanced age, CNS pathology (stroke, dementia), cancer (except early stage head/neck cancer), disorientation, and low serum albumin. The Tube Feeding Death Spiral The clinical scenario, the tube feeding death spiral, typically goes like this: Hospital admission for complication of “brain failure” or other predictable end organ failure due to primary illnesses (e.g. urosepsis in setting of advanced dementia) Inability to swallow and/or direct evidence of aspiration and/or weight loss with little oral intake Swallowing evaluation followed by a recommendation for non-oral feeding either due to aspiration or inadequate intake Feeding tube placed leading to increasing “agitation” leading to patient-removal or dislodgement of feeding tube Re-insertion of feeding tube; hand and/or chest restraints placed Aspiration pneumonia Intravenous antibiotics and pulse oximetry Repeat 4 – 6 one or more times Family conference Death Note: at my institution, the finding of a dying patient with a feeding tube, restraints, and pulse oximetry is known as Weissman’s triad. Suggestions Recognize that the inability to maintain nutrition through the oral route, in the setting of a chronic life-limiting illness and declining function, is usually a marker of the dying process. Discuss this with families as a means to a larger discussion of overall end of life goals. Ensure that your colleagues are aware of the key data and recommendations on tube feedings (see Fast Fact #10 ). Ensure there is true informed consent prior to feeding tube insertion—families must be given alternatives (e.g. hand feeding, comfort measures) along with discussion of goals and prognosis. Assist families by providing information and a clear recommendation for or against the use of a feeding tube. Families who decide against feeding tube placement can be expected to second guess their decision and will need continued team support. If a feeding tube is placed establish clear goals (e.g. improved function) and establish a timeline for re-evaluation to determine if goals are being met (typically 2-4 weeks). References Finucane TE, et al. Tube feeding in patients with advanced dementia. JAMA. 1999; 282:1365-1369. Finucane TE, Bynum JP. Use of tube feeding to prevent aspiration pneumonia. Lancet. 1996; 348:1421-24. Cowen ME et al. Survival estimates for patients with abnormal swallowing studies. JGIM. 1997; 12:88-94. Rabeneck L, et al. Long term outcomes of patients receiving percutaneous endoscopic gastrostomy tubes. JGIM. 1996; 11:287-293. Grant MD, et al. Gastrostomy placement and mortality among hospitalized Medicare beneficiaries. JAMA. 1998; 279:1973-1976. Mitchell SL. Clinical Crossroads: a 93-year-old man with advanced dementia and eating problems. JAMA. 2007; 298:2527-2536. Cervo FA, Bryan L, Farber S. To PEG or not to PEG. A review of evidence for placing feeding tubes in advanced dementia and the decision-making process. Geriatrics. 2006; 61:30-35. ACGME Competencies: Medical Knowledge, Patient Care Keyword(s): Non-Pain Symptoms and Syndromes 
#085 Epidural Analgesia, 2nd ed Author(s): Debra Gordon RN and Mark Schroeder MD Background Epidural analgesia with local anesthetics, opioids, and/or alpha-agonists can provide superior regional analgesia over conventional systemic routes (IV or PO). In contrast to drugs administered systemically, drugs administered in the epidural space are extremely potent since the drug is delivered close to the site of action (opioid and alpha receptors in the spinal dorsal horn or local anesthetic blockade of nerve roots). Because of this, systemic side effects such as nausea, sedation, and constipation, are minimized. In palliative care, epidural analgesia may be appropriate for patients with regional pain (e.g. pelvic pain from cervical cancer) and/or patients who do not tolerate or obtain relief from oral/parenteral drugs and non-drug therapies. Drug Distribution Drugs administered epidurally are distributed by three main pathways: Diffusion through the dura into the CSF, then to the spinal cord or nerve roots. Vascular uptake by the vessels in the epidural space into systemic circulation. Uptake by the fat in the epidural space; creating a drug depot from which the drug can eventually enter the CSF or the systemic circulation. Patient Controlled Epidural Analgesia (PCEA) Epidural analgesia can be administered by intermittent boluses (by a clinician or by patient controlled epidural analgesia using an appropriate pump); continuous infusion; or a combination of both. PCEA is used to supplement a basal rate, to allow a patient to manage breakthrough pain in order to meet their individual analgesic requirements. Like IV PCA, PCEA can provide more timely pain relief, more control for the patient, and convenience for both the patient and nurse to reduce the time required to obtain and administer required supplemental boluses. Unlike IV PCA, the lockout interval of PCEA varies widely based on the lipid solubility of the opioid administered, from 10 minutes with fentanyl to 60-90 minutes when morphine is used. If local anesthetic is used, the lockout interval should be at least 15 minutes to allow for peak effect of the supplemental local anesthetic dose. Management Due to the proximity of drug delivery to its site of action, frequent assessment of pain relief, side effects, and signs or symptoms of technical complications (catheter dislodgement, epidural hematoma or abscess, pump malfunction, etc.) are necessary. This should be done every hour for the first 24 hours, then every 4 hours. Assess and document on the pain management flowsheet: Patient’s pain rating using patient-specific pain scale (e.g. 0-10), both at rest and with activity. Level of sedation & respiratory rate, preferably by the same nurse during each shift. Side effects: pruritis, nausea, urinary retention, orthostatic hypotension, motor block. Sign of catheter insertion site infection or epidural abscess such as back pain, tenderness, erythema, swelling, drainage, fever, malaise, neck stiffness, progressive numbness, or motor block. Changes in sensory/motor function that may indicate an epidural hematoma including unexplained back pain, leg pain, bowel or bladder dysfunction, motor block. This Fast Fact was adapted with permission from the University of Wisconsin Hospital & Clinics, Madison, WI Pain Patient Care Team ‘Pain Management Fast Facts – 5 Minute Inservice’ series. References Pasero C, Portenoy RK, McCaffery M. Opioid Analgesics. In: McCaffery M, Pasero C, eds. Pain: Clinical Manual. 2nd Ed. St Louis, MO: Mosby: 1999: pp161-299. Mann C, et al. Postoperative patient-controlled analgesia in the elderly: risks and benefits of epidural versus intravenous administration. Drugs & Aging. 2003; 20(5):337-45. Antok E, et al. Patient-controlled epidural analgesia versus continuous epidural infusion with ropivacaine for postoperative analgesia in children. Anesthesia & Analgesia. 2003; 97(6):1608-11. ACGME Competencies: Medical Knowledge, Patient Care Keyword(s): Pain – Non-Opioids; Pain – Opioids 
#086 Methadone: Starting Dosing Information, 2nd ed Author(s): Charles F von Gunten MD Background Methadone is an effective opioid analgesic for severe pain. Because of low cost (a month’s supply may be US $5-10) and apparent efficacy in complex pain syndromes, it is increasingly used as a first-line opioid. It is, in effect, a combination drug – part opioid and part NMDA receptor antagonist – although there is yet to be any evidence from controlled trials that it is a superior first-line analgesic to other opioids. Methods of dose conversion to methadone from other opioid analgesics that account for its dual action were discussed in Fast Fact#75 . A future Fast Fact will discuss different protocols for switching to methadone from other opioids. This Fast Fact will describe strategies for beginning methadone when the patient has not been taking a strong opioid. Note: due to its complex pharmacology, physicians unfamiliar with methadone are advised to seek consultation prior to initiating therapy (see Fast Fact #171 ). Pharmacology Methadone is lipophilic, thus it takes time to develop tissue stores that maintain serum levels. There is enormous interindividual variation in how long this takes. After a single dose there is a short distribution phase (associated with acute pain relief) with a half-life of 2-3 hours and a slow elimination phase (half-life 15-60 hours). Dosing must account for the accumulation of drug over days. It is this accumulation that accounts for most therapeutic misadventures. Liver metabolites are inactive; therefore no dose reduction is required with renal failure. After steady-state is reached, about two-thirds of patients will get adequate pain relief with twice a day dosing. Note: a number of drugs will alter methadone metabolism, so there needs to be close follow-up and attention to the addition or subtraction of interacting medications. There are several approaches to starting methadone for the treatment of pain. All take into account the long-half life of the drug that leads to drug accumulation over days. The following discussion presents approaches based on the literature and the author’s clinical experiences. Conservative Approach Begin fixed dose methadone 5 or 10 mg orally bid or tid for 4-7 days. If incomplete pain relief, increase the dose by 50% and continue for 4-7 days. Continue increasing dose every 4-7 days until stable pain relief achieved. Breakthrough pain: use an alternative short acting oral opioid with short half-life (e.g. morphine 10 mg) every 1 h PRN for breakthrough pain and to provide pain relief during titration phase. This dose too may need to be titrated based on efficacy. Loading Dose Approach Load: Start methadone at fixed oral dose (e.g. 5 or 10 mg) q 4h PRN only . Calculate Maintenance: On day 8, calculate the total methadone dosage taken over the last 24 hour period and give that in scheduled, divided doses bid or tid. Give 10% of total daily methadone as PRN drug q1h for breakthrough pain. Instruct the patient to call you if they need to use more than 5 breakthrough doses per day. Example: if someone took a total of 45 mg methadone on day 7 they would be converted to 15 mg tid scheduled with 5 mg as the prn dose. References Bruera E, Sweeney C. Methadone use in cancer patients with pain: a review. J Pall Med. 2002; 5:127-138. Bruera E, et al. Methadone versus morphine as a first-line strong opioid for cancer pain: a randomized, double-blind Study. J Clin Oncol. 2004; 22:185-92. ACGME Competencies: Medical Knowledge, Patient Care Keyword(s): Pain – Opioids 
#087 Medicare Hospice Benefit Part II: Places of Care and Funding, 2nd ed Author(s): Robin Turner MD and Drew A Rosielle MD Introduction Hospice care can be elected by any Medicare beneficiary with a terminal illness. Fast Fact #82 described eligibility for the Medicare Hospice Benefit (MHB) and the services it covers. This Fast Fact will review where services are provided and the reimbursement system for hospice care. Fast Fact #90 reviews special interventions under the MHB, and #140 further discusses levels of care. Places of Care Home: The majority (~95%) of hospice care takes place in the home. Hospice team members visit the patient and family on an intermittent basis determined by the Plan of Care (see Fast Fact #82 ), which changes based on the patient’s needs. Medicare rules do not require a primary caregiver in the home, but as death nears, it becomes increasingly difficult to provide care for a patient who does not have someone (family, friends, hired caregivers) who can be present 24 hours a day in the home. Long-term care facility: 25% of patients in the US die in nursing homes. Medicare recognizes that this can be the resident’s ‘home’ and that the patient’s ‘family’ frequently includes the nursing home staff. Hospice care under the MHB can be provided to residents in addition to usual care provided by the facility. Individual hospice programs must establish a contract with the facility to provide hospice care. The MHB does not pay for nursing home room and board charges. Hospice inpatient unit: Dedicated units, either free-standing or within other facilities (such as nursing homes or hospitals) are available in some regions. Permitted length-of-stay varies with the facility and its specific admission policies, as do room and board fees charged to patients. Hospital: When pain or other symptoms related to the terminal illness cannot be managed at home, the patient may be admitted to a hospital for more intensive management, still under the MHB. The inpatient facility must have a contract with the hospice program to provide this service. Payment Medicare pays for covered services using a per diem capitated arrangement in one of four categories (see Fast Fact #140 ). The rates below reflect 2008 Medicare and Medicaid reimbursements. Routine Home Care: care at home or nursing home (~$135/day). Inpatient Respite Care: care in an inpatient setting (nursing home, hospice facility, or hospital) for up to 5 days to give caregivers a rest (~$150/day). General Inpatient Care: acute inpatient care (at a hospital or hospice facility) for conditions related to the terminal illness such as pain and symptom control, caregiver breakdown, or impending death (~$600/day). Continuous Home Care: provides acute care at home with around-the-clock nursing for a crisis that might otherwise lead to inpatient care (~$790/day). The rates of reimbursement are fixed for each category of care on an annual basis, but they vary by geographical location. Cited rates are approximate and are intended to convey general orders of magnitude of payment. Payment is made from Medicare to the hospice agency, which then pays the hospital or nursing home (for respite or acute care), depending on the specifics of the contractual arrangement between the hospice agency and the facility. Physician Services Direct patient care services by physicians, for care related to the terminal illness, are reimbursed by Medicare, and are not included in the per diem. If the attending physician is not associated with the hospice program, the physician bills Medicare Part B in the usual fashion. The bill must indicate that the physician is not associated with the hospice program or the claim may be denied. If the attending is associated with the hospice program (e.g. as a medical director) the physician submits the bill to the hospice program, which in turn submits the claim to Medicare under Part A. The physician is then reimbursed based on a contract with the hospice program. Patients can see consulting physicians under the MHB if the hospice agency contracts with the consultant to do so. The hospice agency submits the claim under Medicare Part A and reimburses the consultant per their contract. References von Gunten CF, et al. Coding and reimbursement mechanisms for physician services in hospice and palliative care. J Pall Med. 2000; 3:157-164. Gazelle G. Understanding hospice – an underutilized option for life’s final chapter. NEJM. 2007; 357:321-324. Hospice Center. Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services. Available at: http://www.cms.hhs.gov/center/hospice.asp. Accessed November 1, 2007. ACGME Competencies: Systems-Based Practice Keyword(s): Ethics, Law, Policy Health Systems 
#088 Nightmares, 2nd ed Author(s): Seema Malhotra MD, Robert Arnold MD, and Kevin Patterson MD Background Good, restful sleep is essential to quality of life – providing renewed energy for the next day. Nightmares are vivid, frightening dreams that typically lead to full awakening with detailed recollection of the dream sequence and content. Following a nightmare, heart rate and blood pressure are elevated, and residual anxiety may interfere with the ability to return to sleep. Nightmares occur almost exclusively during REM (Rapid Eye Movement) sleep. Causes Psychiatric Anxiety is a common symptom during a life-threatening illness. Specifically, anxieties related to the illness course and prognosis, procedures and treatments, family issues, and death, can be significant. Nightmares may arise as a complication of anxiety or other psychiatric disturbances (such as post-traumatic stress disorder, delirium, mood disorders, schizophrenia, and adjustment disorders). Medications/Drugs/Alcohol Medications causally linked to nightmares include: beta-blockers, sedative/hypnotics, amphetamines and other stimulants, dopamine agonists, and antidepressants. Withdrawal from REM-suppressing drugs, including antidepressants, benzodiazepines, and alcohol, predisposes to the development of nightmares. Brain disorders CNS infections, brain tumors and other structural problems of the brain may lead to nightmares. Metabolic hypoglycemia. Psychotherapeutic Interventions can be particularly helpful for people whose nightmares are related to stress/anxiety or an underlying psychiatric condition. Supportive Psychotherapy Brief, supportive psychotherapy can address a patient’s anxieties and concerns; the therapist helps the patient with problem solving, seeking information and support, and accepting aspects of their situation which cannot be changed. Behavioral techniques Relaxation training, desensitization, and dream imagery rehearsal therapy may help reduce nightmares. In imagery rehearsal therapy, the patient writes down the disturbing dream, changes the content, and practices the new, positive scenario mentally during the day; this new imagery during the day reduces nightmares at night. Pharmacologic Management The pharmacologic treatment of nightmares has not been studied in controlled clinical trials. Case studies and anecdotal reports suggest the following drugs or drug classes may be effective: Atypical Antipsychotics risperidone (0.5-2 mg qhs) and olanzapine (5 mg) have both been shown to reduce nightmares in small pilot studies of patients with acute stress and PTSD, including reduction in flashbacks, hyperarousal, and disturbed sleep. Alpha-1 Antagonists prazosin (2-15 mg qhs) has been shown to reduce nightmares and other sleep-related symptoms in PTSD patients in multiple small studies and a single randomized controlled trial involving 13 patients. Benzodiazepines and Tricyclic Antidepressants may be of benefit in suppressing REM activity. Note: trazadone does not suppress REM activity. Other Both cyproheptadine and topiramate have been reported to suppress nightmares in small case series. References Berlant J. Open-Label Topiramate as Primary or Adjunctive Therapy in Chronic Civilian Posttraumatic Stress Disorder: A Preliminary Report. J Clin Psychiatry. 2002; 63(1):15-20. Buysse DJ et al. In: Gabbard G, ed. Treatments of Psychiatric Disorders, 2nd Edition. Washington, DD: American Psychiatric Press; 1995: pp2395-2453. Sateia MJ et al. In: Doyle D, et al, eds. Oxford Textbook of Palliative Medicine, 2nd Edition. New York, NY: Oxford University Press; 1998: pp751-767. Krakow B et al. Imagery Rehearsal Therapy for Chronic Nightmares in Sexual Assault Survivors with Posttraumatic Stress Disorder: A Randomized Controlled Trial. JAMA. 2001; 286(5):537-545. Labbate LA. Olanzapine for Nightmares and Sleep Disturbance in Posttraumatic Stress Disorder [comment]. Can J Psych. 2000; 45(7):667-668. Stanovic JK et al. The Effectiveness of Risperidone on Acute Stress Symptoms in Adult Burn Patients: A Preliminary Retrospective Pilot Study. J Burn Care Rehabilitation. 2001; 22(3):210-213. Taylor, FB et al. Prazosin Effects on Objective Sleep Measures and Clinical Symptoms in Civilian Trauma Posttraumatic Stress Disorder: A Placebo-Controlled Study. Biol Psychiatry. 2008; 15:629-32. Thompson DF et al. Drug-Induced Nightmares. Ann Pharmacother. 1999; 33(1):93-98. ACGME Competencies: Medical Knowledge Keyword(s): Ethics, Law, Policy Health Systems 
#089 Pain Management in Nursing Homes: Analgesic Prescribing Tips, 2nd ed Author(s): Solomon Liao MD and David E Weissman MD Background Approximately 25% of deaths in the United States occur in long-term care facilities – a care setting in which pain is common, and often poorly treated. Reasons include inadequate pain education for nursing home staff, perceived regulatory barriers in the use of opioid analgesics, societal barriers regarding the nature of pain in the elderly (e.g. pain is part of normal aging and thus need not be treated), and high prevalence of resident cognitive impairment leading to inadequate pain assessment (see Fast Fact #126 ). Physicians can help improve pain management of their nursing home residents by the way in which they prescribe analgesics. This Fast Fact will review simple strategies for improving pain management outcomes. How are medications distributed in nursing homes? There is a critical shortage of licensed nurses in nursing homes; it is common for there to be only one nurse for 15-30 residents. In most facilities, scheduled medications are distributed twice per 8 hour shift by a licensed vocational or practical nurse (LVN or LPN), who often have minimal pain education. This system limits the opportunity for a skilled nurse to do frequent assessments of pain and monitoring the response to analgesics. The large patient-nurse staffing ratio limits the utility of PRN medication orders, especially orders more frequent than every 4 hours, and also limits the ability of nurses to monitor pain in cognitively impaired residents, since these residents are typically unable to initiate a request for PRN medication. Thus, specific instructions from the prescriber for how a medication is to be used are vital. Tips for improving pain management Communicate your concerns regarding pain with a nursing supervisor. Discuss how to maximize opportunities for a) pain assessment and b) provision of timely feedback to you for medication changes. Review with the nursing supervisor the facility’s method of pain assessment documentation and standards for pain assessment and treatment. Write an order for a nurse to do a complete pain assessment on a regular basis. Whenever pain is constant, write an order for a scheduled medication, preferably a long-acting medication. Write orders for PRN medication at intervals of every four hours (e.g. morphine sulfate immediate release 15 mg q4h PRN pain). If you know that the patient is likely to need frequent PRN medication, write the order as a scheduled order with “hold if no pain” or “patient may refuse.” Do not write simultaneous PRN orders for multiple analgesics—only one opioid/non-opioid combination product (such as oxycodone with acetaminophen) should be prescribed at any one time. Plan ahead – it is common for nursing home residents to have increasing pain related to physical therapy, dressing changes, etc. Write an analgesic order that anticipates painful activity (e.g. morphine elixir 10 mg PO 30 min prior to bath). Don’t forget to order a prophylactic bowel regimen for patients on opioids. Include options for non-pharmacological pain therapies (e.g. heat, massage, PT). References Jones KR, Fink R, Pepper G, Hutt E, Vojir CP, Scott J, Clark L, Mellis K. Improving nursing home staff knowledge and attitudes about pain. Gerontologist. 2004; 44(4):469-78. Winn PA, Dentino AN. Effective pain management in the long-term care setting. J Am Med Dir Assoc. 2004; 5(5):342-52. Tarzian AJ, Hoffmann DE. Barriers to managing pain in the nursing home: findings from a statewide survey. J Am Med Dir Assoc. 2005; 6(3 Suppl):S13-9. Weissman DE, Griffie, J, Muchka S, Matson S. Building an institutional commitment to pain management in long-term care facilities. J Pain Symptom Manage. 2000; 20:35-43. Stevenson KM, Dahl JL, Berry PH, Beck SL, Griffie J. Institutionalizing effective pain management practices: practice change programs to improve the quality of pain management in small health care organizations. J Pain Symptom Manage. 2006; 31(3):248-61. ACGME Competencies: Medical Knowledge, Patient Care, Systems-Based Practice Keyword(s): Pain – Opioids 
#090 Medicare Hospice Benefit Part III: Special Interventions, 2nd ed Author(s) : Robin Turner MD and Drew A Rosielle MD Introduction This Fast Fact will discuss the use of interventions in hospice care that can be controversial due to high cost and/or uncertainty whether they constitute ‘palliative’ interventions. When a patient elects the Medicare Hospice Benefit (MHB), the patient, the doctor, and the hospice team develop a Plan of Care (POC) that lists a) the patient’s goals for care and b) the services needed to achieve these goals. A hospice program is fiscally responsible for all services outlined in the POC, and these services are paid for from the pool of money the hospice program gets from per diem payments (physician fees are billed separately – see Fast Fact #87 ). Note: Since there is no Medicare regulation that specifies what treatments are deemed ’palliative’, it is up to the individual hospice agency to determine whether or not they can financially and philosophically provide the interventions listed below. Most hospice agencies are not able to provide high-cost interventions due to financial limitations; patients may elect to be discharged from hospice care if they wish to pursue these options. Hospices with a large number of enrolled patients have greater financial resources and thus are better able to provide high-cost treatments. Recently, some hospices have introduced ‘open-access’ programs which more freely provide costly and even life-prolonging therapies to dying patients who would otherwise benefit from hospice services. The hope is that the increased costs will be covered by increased revenue from enrolling more patients earlier in the course of their illness. Indications for use in Hospice Care In general, the interventions listed below are potentially indicated in patients with a) a good functional status (up, out of bed > 50% of the time; Karnofsky Performance Status >50; ECOG ≤2 – see Fast Facts #13 , 124 ), or b) a clear goal to be met (e.g. wedding anniversary in two weeks). These interventions are not indicated solely to assist patients or families psychologically cope with impending death – to give the impression that ’something is being done.’ Parenteral Fluids Indication: symptomatic dehydration where there is a patient-defined goal (e.g. upcoming family event). Fluids are not indicated to treat dry mouth or solely to reverse dehydration occurring as a normal aspect of the dying process; fluids may be of benefit to treat delirium in selected patients (see Fast Fact #133 ). Enteral feeding Indication: patient is hungry and there is a reason oral nutrition cannot be given (e.g. upper GI obstruction from esophageal cancer). See Fast Facts #10 , 84 for a complete review of the indications/contraindications for tube feeding. Total Parenteral Nutrition Indication: patient has short-gut syndrome or bowel obstruction and good functional status and a functional goal. See Fast Fact #190 for further discussion. Radiation Therapy Indication: symptoms of pain, bleeding, or neurological catastrophe (e.g. acute spinal cord compression) and the patient is expected to live long enough to experience benefit (> 4 weeks) and the potential benefits outweigh logistic burdens (e.g. travel to the radiotherapy site, getting on and off the treatment table). See Fast Facts#66 , 67 . Red Blood Cell Transfusions or Erythropoietin Indication: Symptomatic anemia (dyspnea or fatigue) in ambulatory patients who demonstrate continued functional benefit from treatment. Platelet Transfusions Indication: active bleeding and severe thrombocytopenia (Platelet count < 10,000). Chemotherapy Indication: symptoms from the cancer are causing distress; the likelihood of effectiveness is high (expected Response Rate greater than 25% - see Fast Facts #14 , 99 ); patient will live long enough to benefit (> 4-8 weeks, ECOG 0-2); and benefits outweigh burdens. Antibiotics Indication: oral antibiotics are appropriate to treat simple symptomatic infections (e.g. UTI). Parenteral antibiotics are not indicated unless there is an identified susceptible organism, there is a clear functional goal to be met, the likelihood of successful treatment is high, and the patient is expected to live long enough to achieve benefit. Laboratory/Diagnostic service Indication: to monitor aspects of POC (e.g. warfarin monitoring) or as part of a diagnostic evaluation for a new symptom for which the testing is likely to substantially alter patient management. Note: diagnosis of a new problem that does not relate to the terminal illness can be evaluated and treated by the patient’s primary care provider under usual Medicare billing (e.g. acute myocardial infarction). References The Hospice Manual. Centers for Medicare & Medicaid Services. Available at: http://www.cms.hhs.gov/manuals/downloads/pub_21.zip. Accessed November 1, 2007. Wright AA, Katz IT. Letting go of the rope – aggressive treatment, hospice care, and open access. NEJM. 2007; 357:324-327. Marantz Henig R. Will we ever arrive at the good death? New York Times. August 7, 2005. Available at: http://www.nytimes.com/2005/08/07/magazine/07DYINGL.html. Accessed November 2, 2007. ACGME Competencies: Medical Knowledge, Patient Care Keyword(s): Ethics, Law, Policy Health Systems 
#091 Interventional Options for Malignant Upper GI Obstruction, 2nd ed Author(s): James Ouellette DO, Lisa Patterson MD, and Paula Termuhlen MD Background Patients with unresectable cancers of the upper gastrointestinal tract often suffer severe symptoms due to pain, nausea and vomiting, weight loss, cachexia, and poor food tolerance. This can be related to gastric and duodenal cancers causing intrinsic obstruction of the intestinal lumen or pancreatic and biliary cancers causing extrinsic biliary compression. Management options vary depending on the site of obstruction, the patient’s functional status, the patient-defined goals of care, and estimated prognosis. Fast Fact #45 discussed medical management options. This Fact Fact reviews interventional approaches for upper GI obstructions, especially when further radiation, chemotherapy, medical management, or curative surgical options are longer helpful. Listed below are treatment options for managing different sites of obstruction (listed from least invasive to most invasive). Management decisions for these problems are complex, requiring a multi-disciplinary approach (involving surgery, gastroenterology, medical and radiation oncology, radiology, and palliative care) to achieve the best possible outcome with minimum morbidity. Esophageal obstruction External beam radiation therapy (successful in 40% of patients) Endoscopic laser therapy (can be repeated every 4-6 weeks) Endoscopic/fluoroscopic stenting (different stent materials are available for different situations) Gastric or Duodenal obstruction Nasogastric tube decompression (poor long-term solution due to patient discomfort) Venting gastrostomy tube, which allows for drainage of intestinal contents (can be placed endoscopically, laparoscopically, or with open surgery) Janeway gastrostomy (surgically created gastrocutaneous fistula) Endoscopically/fluoroscopically placed stent across the site of obstruction (e.g. pylorus) Laparoscopic gastrojejunostomy Open gastrojejunostomy If unable to restore continuity of the gastrointestinal tract with a surgical procedure to bypass the obstruction, a combination of a gastrostomy tube with a separate jejunostomy tube can be used. This can provide enteral nutrition to the small intestine while venting the stomach. Patients can enjoy the pleasure of eating, even if the food is drained through the G-tube. Pancreaticobiliary obstructions Stent placement (plastic or metal) across obstruction through an endoscopic procedure (ERCP) Stent/drain placement across obstruction by a radiologic procedure (transhepatic) Laparoscopic cholecystojejunostomy (after gallstone absence is confirmed) Open choledochojejunostomy, cholecystojejunostomy or hepaticojejunostomy Adjuvant medications may augment the efficacy of these interventions. Proton pump inhibitor to reduce gastric secretions. Sucralfate (Carafate) slurry, 1 gram q6 hours, for patients with ulcerated esophageal or gastric lesions. Metoclopramide (Reglan) 10 mg tid to qid, as a prokinetic drug. Octreotide (Sandostatin) 50-100 micrograms q6-8 h for high volume output conditions. References Harris G, Senagore A, et al. The management of neoplastic colorectal obstruction with colonic endoluminal stenting devices. Am J Surg. 2001; 181:499-506. Acunas B, Poyanli A, Rozanes I. Intervention in gastrointestinal tract: the treatment of esophageal, gastroduodenal and colorectal obstructions with metallic stents. Eur J Rad. 2002; 42:240-248. Choi Y. Laparoscopic gastrojejunostomy for palliation of gastric outlet obstruction in unresectable gastric cancer. Surg Endoscop. 2002; 16:1620-1626. Tang CN, Siu WT, et al. Laparoscopic biliary bypass – a single centre experience. Hepatogastroenterology. 2007; 54:503-7. Jeurnink SM, Steyerberg EW, et al. Gastrojejunostomy versus stent placement in patients with malignant gastric outlet obstruction: a comparison in 95 patients. J Surg Oncol. 2007; 96:389-96. Frech EJ, Douglas AG. Endoscopic therapy for malignant bowel obstruction. J Supp Oncol. 2007; 5:303-310,319. Laval G, Arvieux C, et al. Protocol for the treatment of malignant inoperable bowel obstruction: a prospective study of 80 cases at Grenoble University Hospital Center. J Pain Symptom Manage. 2006; 31:502-512. ACGME Competencies: Medical Knowledge, Patient Care Keyword(s): Non-Pain Symptoms and Syndromes 
#092 Patient Controlled Analgesia in Palliative Care, 2nd ed Author(s): Eric Prommer MD Introduction Patient Controlled Analgesia (PCA) is a technique allowing patients to self-administer parenteral analgesics. The primary advantage of PCA is to shorten the interval from the time of patient-defined need to the time of actual analgesic administration. PCA is an effective, safe, and well-accepted treatment for post-operative pain, sickle cell crisis pain (as young as age 4), and cancer pain. In general, PCA will provide the same degree of analgesia compared to other delivery systems with the same or less total amount of medication. PCA allows for more immediate relief of incident (breakthrough) pain and can provide patients with a greater sense of personal control over their pain. Indications The primary indication for PCA is the patient who requires parenteral analgesia (e.g. severe pain and/or oral/transdermal/rectal route not useable) and has incident pain or other pain patterns that are not predictable. PCA is also indicated for use as a method of rapid dose titration and dose finding in acute, severe pain. Relative contraindications include patients who a) do not have the cognitive ability to understand how to use a PCA device, or b) have an anticipated need for parenteral opioids less than 24 hours. PCA devices Most devices have a drug reservoir and infusion system whereby PCA administration can occur with or without a background continuous infusion. Thus, PCA devices need the following orders; 1) PCA dose in mg or mcg (‘patient initiated dose,’ ‘patient demand dose,’ or ‘bolus dose’), 2) Delay Interval (’lockout’) – in minutes (period during which the patient cannot obtain additional demand medication), 3) Continuous infusion (CI) Rate in mg/hr or mcg/hr (if CI is used), and 4) Hour Limit – maximum amount of drug to be dispensed in a defined period of time. Often the one hour limit is set to deliver 3-5 times the estimated required hourly dose. (Note: due to the need for frequent dose adjustments, the Hour Limit is often omitted in palliative care). Most palliative care patients will need both PCA demand and CI dosing. Opioids used in PCA devices include morphine, hydromorphone, fentanyl, and methadone. IV or SQ are the most common routes of administration; PCA can also be used with epidural, intrathecal, or intraventricular opioid administration (see Fast Facts #28 , 85 , and 98 ). Dosing in opioid-naïve patients The following information is for morphine, the first-line drug of choice for most patients. Note: dosing and delay interval information will differ with other opioids. Start dosing: PCA demand dose = 1-3 mg morphine; Delay Interval = 8-10 min. Initial CI (if any) is dependent on the clinical situation. For instance, 1 mg/hour of IV morphine is approximately equivalent to 35 mg bid of oral morphine ER. This may be excessive for opioid-naïve patients; conversely many opioid-naïve patients with severe pain will easily tolerate this, so the decision to immediately start a CI depends on clinician judgment. If not started immediately, one can initiate a CI after four hours by summing the total demand dose given over 4 hours and converting that into an hourly rate (e.g. if 16 mg is given over four hours, CI would be 4 mg/hour). A new PCA demand dose can then be calculated at 50% of the hourly CI rate (4 mg/hr ÷ 2 = 2 mg PCA demand dose , Delay Interval 8-10 min). Dosing in non-naïve patients Convert their current total oral/transdermal dose to a total 24 hour IV dose; divide by 24 to give the hourly CI rate in mg/hour (see Fast Fact #36 on dose conversions). The PCA demand dose is initially calculated at 50% of the hourly rate. Risk of Overdose The patient who is pushing his or her own PCA button will fall asleep before serious signs of overdose occur as long as only the patient pushes the button. Note: special care is needed for patients with sleep apnea as they will be more sensitive to opioids. Dose titration and Loading Doses See Fast Facts #20 Opioid Dose Escalation, #54 Opioid Infusions in the Imminently Dying Patient, and #72 Opioid Infusion Titration Orders. Common Sense Cautions These dosing recommendations are rough guidelines—clinicians need to take into account pain severity, patient age, renal and pulmonary function, co-morbid illness, and other psychoactive medications. When in doubt, it is advised to use a lower CI rate (with upward dose adjustments of the CI rate no more frequently than every 8 hours), while adjusting the PCA dose at frequent intervals (q30-60 minutes) to effectively control pain. References Bruera E, Ripamonti C. Current status of patient-controlled analgesia in cancer patients. Oncology (Williston Park). 1997; 11:373-384. Citron ML. Ripamonti-Bruera article reviewed. Oncology (Williston Park).1997; 11:384-386. McCaffery M, Pasero C, eds. Pain: Clinical Manual. 2nd Ed. St Louis, MO: Mosby; 1999. ACGME Competencies: Medical Knowledge, Patient Care Keyword(s): Pain – Opioids 
#093 Cannabinoids in the Treatment of Symptoms in Cancer and AIDS, 2nd ed Author(s): L Scott Wilner MD and Robert M Arnold MD Introduction The healing properties of cannabis have been asserted for centuries. Popular claims notwithstanding, there are no data to support the use of marijuana in the treatment of asthma, anxiety, depression, epilepsy, glaucoma, alcohol withdrawal, or infection; and limited data to support using cannabinoids as analgesics. Recent scientific studies of cannabinoids for symptom management have focused on nausea/vomiting and appetite stimulation. Terminology Cannabis sativa is the Indian hemp plant. Marijuana is a psychoactive substance derived from the plant. Cannabinoids are the biologically active compounds in the plant. THC is delta-9 tetrahydrocannabinol, the major cannabinoid. Dronabinol is synthetic THC and the main ingredient in the Schedule 3 drug Marinol. Nabilone is an engineered THC analog that forms the basis of the Schedule 2 drug Cesamet. Pharmacology Cannabinoids act on cannabinoid receptors: the CB1 receptor in the CNS and on the CB2 receptor localized primarily to immune cells. Dronabinol and nabilone are well absorbed orally, but first pass metabolism and protein binding limit bioavailability. Dronabinol has a faster onset of action (~30 minutes), while nabilone has a longer duration of action (typically 8 – 12 hours, but potentially as long as 24 hours in some patients). Alternative delivery systems – including inhalers, suppositories, and transdermal patches – are being evaluated. Anti-emetic Use Dronabinol and nabilone are FDA approved for the treatment of nausea and vomiting associated with cancer chemotherapy in patients who have failed to respond to conventional antiemetics. Cannabinoids in this context have two limitations. First, studies show that these agents, while efficacious in – and preferred by – many patients, have potent side effects and a variably narrow therapeutic window. Second, newer types of antiemetic therapy, including the 5-HT3 receptor antagonists and a neurokinin-1 receptor antagonist, have since been developed that appear to be both extremely effective and generally well tolerated. There are no published studies comparing dronabinol and nabilone to these newer generation agents, or to each other. Orexigenic Use (Appetite Stimulation) Dronabinol is FDA approved for the treatment of anorexia associated with weight loss in patients with HIV/AIDS. Early studies of dronabinol in this population showed promising increases in caloric intake and stabilization or gains in weight. However, later analysis showed that the effect sometimes represented accumulation of water or fat instead of the preferred lean body mass. Nabilone is not approved as an appetite stimulant. There is no strong evidence supporting either cannabinoid for cancer associated anorexia. Side Effects Side effects are both physiologic (hypotension with reflex tachycardia, gastroparesis, ataxia, somnolence, dry mouth) and psychologic (euphoria, poor concentration, and – at high doses – anxiety, delusions, and hallucinations). Symptoms are typically dose related, vary among patients, and are worse in the elderly. Tolerance to many of these effects develops over 1 to 2 weeks. Dronabinol contains sesame oil and poses a risk of anaphylaxis to those with a hypersensitivity to sesame seeds or nuts. Relative contraindications include a history of seizures, and concurrent use of alcohol, sedatives, hypnotics, or other psychoactive agents. Patients taking cannabinoids should be advised not to drive. Prescribing Guidelines ANTIEMETIC: Dronabinol is dosed 5 mg/m2 starting 2 hours before chemotherapy and every 4 hours thereafter, to a total of 4 to 6 doses daily. It can be titrated by 2.5 mg/m2, to a per-dose maximum of 15 mg/m2. Nabilone is dosed 1 mg twice daily, starting 3 hours before chemotherapy. It can be increased to 2 mg per dose, with a maximum of 6 mg/day in 3 divided doses. Nabilone is typically less expensive. OREXIGENIC: Dronabinol is started at 2.5 mg twice daily, one hour before lunch and dinner, or as a single 2.5 mg dose at night. It can be increased gradually to a maximum of 20 mg/day, in divided doses. References Walsh D, Nelson KA, Mahmoud FA. Established and potential therapeutic applications of cannabinoids in oncology. Supp Care Cancer. 2003; 11:137-143. Otten EJ. Marijuana. In: LR Goldfrank, NE Flomenbaum, et al, eds. Toxicologic Emergencies, 7th Edition. New York, NY: McGraw-Hill; 2002. Tramer MR, Carroll D, Campbell FA, et al. Cannabinoids for control of chemotherapy induced nausea and vomiting: quantitative systematic review. BMJ. 2001; 323:16-21. Beal JE, Olson R, Laubenstein L, et al. Dronabinol as a Treatment for Anorexia with Weight Loss in Patients with AIDS. J Pain Symptom Manage. 1995; 10:89-97. Jatoi A, Windschitl HE, et al. Dronabinol Versus Megestrol Acetate Versus Combination Therapy for Cancer-Associated Anorexia: A North Central Cancer Treatment Group Study. J Clin Oncol. 2002; 20:567-573. Slatkin NE. Cannabinoids in the treatment of chemotherapy-induced nausea and vomiting: beyond prevention of acute emesis. J Support Oncol. 2007; 5(Suppl 3):1-9. Davis M, Maida V, et al. The emerging role of cannabinoid neuromodulators in symptom management. Supp Care Cancer. 2007; 15(1):63-71. Ben Amar M. Cannabinoids in medicine: A review of their therapeutic potential. J Ethnopharmacology. 2006; 105:1-25. Anonymous. Nabilone (Cesamet) for chemotherapy-induced nausea and vomiting. Medical Letter on Drugs & Therapeutics. 2006; 48(1249/1250):103-4. Nemechek PM, Polsky B, Gottlieb MS. Treatment Guidelines for HIV-associated wasting. Mayo Clinic Proc. 2000; 75(4):386-94. ACGME Competencies: Medical Knowledge, Patient Care Keyword(s): Non-Pain Symptoms and Syndromes 
#094 Writing Discharge/Outpatient Opioid Prescriptions, 2nd ed Author(s): Colleen Dunwoody MS, RN and Robert Arnold MD Background Assuring continuity in pain relief in the outpatient setting or following hospital discharge is an important aspect of patient care. Poorly written prescriptions or orders can be inconvenient for the patient as well as the clinician, but can also lead to prescriptions not being filled, inadequate pain control, and patient suffering. This Fast Fact will touch on some practical considerations in writing opioid prescriptions. See also Fast Fact #89 for writing orders for patients in long term care facilities, #74 for a general discussion of proper opioid order writing, and #198 for further discussion of regulatory issues. Regulations Different states have different rules concerning controlled substances: amount of drug that may be dispensed, number of refills, faxing of orders and telephone prescriptions, and requirements for special prescription forms or blanks. Review your state regulations. See the website below for state-by-state listings. Legibility The DEA number and name must be legible. Print your name after your signature or otherwise indicate the spelling of your name on a personalized prescription. Frequency Consider if the frequency you are prescribing is the recommended frequency. Third party payers may not pay for medications prescribed to be taken more frequently than recommended in the literature. For example, transdermal fentanyl patches changed q48 hours and oxycodone ER q8 hours may not be paid by insurers without a specific reason. Oxycodone ER and morphine ER may not, and should not, be dispensed when the frequency is PRN or less than 8 hours. Strength There are more than two dozen combination opioids available; it is good practice to always write the correct strength for combination opioids (e.g. oxycodone/acetaminophen 5 mg/325 mg). Be sure the check the available pill/tablet doses when prescribing long acting opioids. When writing prescriptions for different strengths, it is helpful for both the patient and pharmacist to specify that on the prescriptions. For instance, if someone is taking morphine ER 75 mg q12 hours they would require prescriptions for both morphine ER 60mg tabs and 15mg tabs, one should write: “Morphine ER 15 mg tabs. Take one tab PO q12 hours. Take along with your 60 mg tabs to make a total of 75 mg every 12 hours.” Acetaminophen Consider whether the 4000 mg/day maximum can be exceeded when writing the frequency. Most pharmacists will not dispense doses likely to exceed this recommended maximum daily dose. If there is any doubt one should write “…not to exceed X pills in 24 hours.” Tampering Write the number after the numeric ‘10’ (ten) to prevent someone altering the prescription (e.g. changing 10 to 40 by changing a 1 to a 4). Substitutions and Corrections Pharmacists will not correct an improperly written prescription, and some may not accept prescriptions that have obvious corrections (e.g. items crossed out) because there is no way of knowing who did the correction. Nor will a prescription for an opioid be filled when written on a prescription printed with 'not for controlled substances'. Pharmacists also will not make substitutions; if you write for ‘morphine ER 80 mg,’ the pharmacist will not fill it since the medicine is not available as an 80 mg tablet. Communication When prescribing opioids that are infrequently used or in high doses, communicate with the pharmacist before the patient is discharged or leaves your office to assure availability. Pharmacists prefer communication from physicians and nurses in advance so medications can be stocked. Reference Pain & Policy Studies Group. Madison, WI. Available at: http://www.painpolicy.wisc.edu/ . State profiles available at: http://www.painpolicy.wisc.edu/domestic/state_profiles/index.html. ACGME Competencies: Patient Care, Practice-Based Learning and Improvement, Systems-Based Practice Keyword(s): Pain – Opioids 
#095 Opioid Withdrawal, 2nd ed Author(s): Debra Gordon RN and June Dahl PhD Background Physical dependence is a normal and predictable neurophysiological response to regular treatment with opioids for more than 1-2 weeks duration. Continuous or near continuous opioid blood levels are required (thus, one oxycodone-acetaminophen tablet per day will not lead to physical dependence). Physical dependence is characterized by a withdrawal syndrome when the opioid is abruptly discontinued, if an opioid antagonist (naloxone) is given, or when drug blood levels fall below a critical level. Withdrawal can also be caused by administration of a mixed agonist-antagonist (e.g., buprenorphine, butorphanol, nalbuphine, pentazocine). Physical dependence is not a defining condition of addiction (see below and Fast Facts #68 and #69 ). Important definitions Tolerance: state of adaptation in which exposure to a drug induces changes that result in diminution of one or more of the drug’s effects over time. Physical dependence: state of adaption manifested by a drug class-specific withdrawal syndrome that can be produced by abrupt cessation, rapid dose reduction, decreasing blood level of the drug and/or administration of an antagonist. Addiction / psychological dependence: a primary, chronic, neurobiologic disease, with genetic, psychosocial, and environmental factors. Characterized by one or more of the following: impaired control over drug use, compulsive use, continued use despite harm, and craving. Signs and symptoms of the opioid withdrawal syndrome include yawning, sweating, lacrimation, rhinorrhea, anxiety, restlessness, insomnia, dilated pupils, piloerection, chills, tachycardia, hypertension, nausea/vomiting, cramping abdominal pains, diarrhea, and muscle aches and pains. Unlike withdrawal from alcohol or benzodiazepines, opioid withdrawal is not life threatening. Emergence of withdrawal symptoms varies with half-life of the particular opioid; within 6-12 hours after the last dose of a short-acting drug or 72-96 hours following methadone (see Fast Facts #75 and #86 ). Duration and intensity of withdrawal are related to clearance of the drug such that withdrawal is shorter (5-10 days) and more intense for opioids like morphine and less severe and more protracted with methadone. Prevention Opioid withdrawal syndrome should always be prevented. Patients treated with opioids for more than one to two weeks should be instructed to gradually reduce the opioid before discontinuing use. In general, dose reductions of about 20-25% every day or two will allow a tapering schedule to prevent signs and symptoms of withdrawal. An alternative recommendation is to give half the previous dose for the first 2 days and then reduce the dose by 25% every 2 days. When the dose reaches the equivalent of approximately 30mg/day of PO morphine, this dose is given for 2 days, and then the drug is discontinued. It is important to continue to provide around-the-clock opioids to prevent withdrawal in the patient at end-of-life who is no longer able to communicate or take oral opioids. Treatment Clonidine 0.1-0.2mg PO Q 4-6 hours PRN or by transdermal patch (clonidine transdermal 0.1mg/24hour patch which provides 0.1mg a day for 7 days) can be used to treat autonomic hyperactivity symptoms (however, it will not relieve insomnia). The clonidine patch has a very slow onset and may take 2-3 days to achieve therapeutic levels. The major drawback of clonidine therapy is the tendency to cause hypotension in some patients. Other agents used for control of withdrawal symptoms include: diphenoxylate/atropine (Lomotil), hydroxyzine, trazodone, and dicyclomine hydrochloride (Bentyl). For patients still in pain who have abruptly stopped their opioids (because they ran out, lost their prescription, or stopped because of side effects) reinstituting opioid therapy may be appropriate to treat both their withdrawal symptoms and ongoing pain. Depending on how long a patient has been without opioids it may not be safe to reinstate the full opioid dose immediately (especially for long-acting opioids). In this case patients should go through a dose-titration phase with short-acting opioids to safely achieve analgesia. References: McCaffery M, Pasero C. Pain: Clinical Manual. 2 nd Ed. Mosby, St Louis, 1999. American Academy of Pain Medicine (AAPM), American Pain Society (APS), American Society of Addiction Medicine (ASAM). Definitions Related to the Use of Opioids for the Treatment of Pain. Consensus Statement, 2001. Available at: http://www.ampainsoc.org/advocacy/opioids2.htm . Kenna GA, Nielson DM, Mello P, Schiesl A, Swift RM. Pharmacotherapy of dual substance abuse and dependence. CNS Drugs . 2007;21:213-237. Amato L, et al. Effectiveness of interventions on opiate withdrawal treatment: an overview of systematic reviews. Drug & Alcohol Dependence. 2004; 73(3):219-26. Gowing L, Farrel M, Ali R, White JM. Alpha(2)-adrenergic agonists for the management of opioid withdrawal. Cochrane Database Systematic Rev . 2009; ap15;(2):CD002024. Acknowledgement: The Fast Fact is adapted with permission from: D Gordon, RN. Pain Care Fast Facts – 5 Minute Inservice ; University of Wisconsin Pain Team. ACGME Competencies: Medical Knowledge, Patient Care Keyword(s): Pain – Opioids 
#096 Diarrhea in Palliative Care, 2nd ed Author(s): Jeffrey Alderman MD Diarrhea is a debilitating and embarrassing problem, defined as an abnormal looseness of the stools (increased liquidity or decreased consistency). Patients with uncontrolled diarrhea are at increased risk for dehydration, electrolyte imbalance, skin breakdown, and fatigue. Common Causes Diarrhea can usually be divided into different types and treatment will vary depending on cause: secretory, osmotic, mechanical, or disordered motility. In palliative care, the overuse of laxatives, typically seen when the management of constipation is suddenly ‘stepped-up,’ is a common cause. Other causes include partial intestinal obstruction, pancreatic insufficiency, Clostridium difficile infection, chemotherapeutics, and radiation enteritis. Infectious diarrhea is especially common in HIV infection (Cryptosporidia, Giardia lambila, E. histolytica, and Cytomegalovirus). Severe constipation and fecal impaction can also cause diarrhea as backed-up, liquefied stool may be all that the patient can pass (‘overflow diarrhea’). Evaluation Review diet, medications, laxatives, procedures, timing of movements in relation to ingestion of food or liquids, and a description of quantity and quality of stool. When performing a physical exam, make sure to palpate the abdomen and do a rectal exam. Radiographs are often not necessary, but may help clarify a partial bowel obstruction or overflow diarrhea. Keep in mind that patients at the end-of-life are also at risk for developing the same diarrheal illnesses that occur everyday in the general population (viral/bacterial gastroenteritis, adverse effects of medications). Treatment General Ensure adequate hydration; encourage sips of clear liquids; parenteral hydration should be considered for severe dehydration. Simple carbohydrates, toast or crackers, will add back small amounts of electrolytes and glucose; milk and other lactose-containing products should be avoided. Medications include bulk forming agents, antimicrobials, adsorbents, and opioids. Kaolin and Pectin (Kaopectate®) is a suspension of adsorbent and bulk-forming agents, which can provide modest relief from diarrhea. However, kaolin-pectin may take up to 48 hours to produce an effect and can interfere with the absorption of certain medications. Antibiotics: infectious diarrhea should be identified and treated with appropriate antibiotics, particularly C. difficile enteritis. Bismuth has an additional antimicrobial effect, and can be added for increased symptomatic control against organisms such as enterotoxigenic E. Coli. Loperamide (Imodium®), an opioid, reduces peristalsis in the gut, increases water reabsorption, and promotes fecal continence, making it a potent anti-diarrheal agent. Because it only weakly crosses the blood-brain barrier, loperamide’s side effect profile is more favorable than other opioids (e.g. codeine or diphenoxylate [Lomotil®]). The initial dose of loperamide is 4 mg, with titration to 2 mg after each loose stool, with the typical dose being 4 – 8 mg per day. Although the package insert recommends a maximum of 16 mg in a 24-hour period, up to 54 mg per day of loperamide has been used in palliative care settings with few adverse effects. Note: loperamide should be used with caution if an infectious diarrhea is suspected. Aspirin and Cholestyramine can reduce the diarrhea in radiation-induced enteritis, as can addition of a stool bulking agent such as psyllium (Metamucil®). Mesalamine and other antiinflammatories are used for inflammatory bowel disease. Pancreatic Enzymes such as pancrelipase are used for pancreatic insufficiency. Octreotide, although costly, is effective with profuse secretory diarrhea seen in HIV disease, and those with high effluent volume from a stoma. It may be given via continuous subcutaneous infusion at a rate of 10 – 80 mcg every hour until symptoms improve. References Doyle D, et al, eds. Oxford Textbook of Palliative Medicine. 3rd ed. New York, NY: Oxford University Press; 2003. Fallon M, O'Neill B. ABC of palliative care. Constipation and diarrhoea. BMJ. 1997; 315:1293-6. Saunders DC. Principles of symptom control in terminal care. Med Clin North Amer. 1982; 6: 1175. Berger A, et al, eds. Principles and Practice of Palliative Care and Supportive Oncology. 3nd ed. Philadelphia, PA: Lippincott Williams & Wilkins; 2006. McEvoy GK, ed. AHFS Drug Information 2003. Bethesda, MD: American Society of Health-System Pharmacists; 2003: pp2740-41. Ruppin H. Review: loperamide--a potent antidiarrhoeal drug with actions along the alimentary tract. Alimentary Pharmacology & Therapeutics. 1987; 1(3):179-90. ACGME Competencies: Medical Knowledge, Patient Care Keyword(s): Non-Pain Symptoms and Syndromes 
#097 Blocks of the Sympathetic Axis for Visceral Pain, 2nd ed Author(s): Gary M. Reisfield MD and George R Wilson MD Background The sympathetic nervous system spans the length of the axial skeleton; most of the various plexi and ganglia are readily accessible to percutaneous interruption. In the palliative care setting, the most common indication for interrupting the sympathetic axis is to control pain arising from malignancies of the abdominal and pelvic viscera. Visceral pain is often described as constant, deep and is difficult to localize and characterize. When such a pain syndrome is recalcitrant to meticulous application of drug and behavioral therapy, or if the patient is intolerant to drug therapy, consultation should be sought for consideration of neurolytic procedures. Potential advantages of a neurolytic procedure, compared to spinal and epidural anesthetic techniques (see Fast Fact #98), include cost savings and avoidance of hardware (e.g. catheters, tubes, pump), which can be cumbersome, are subject to malfunction, and pose an infection risk. Types of Blocks The following procedures have an established record of success in well-selected patients: Celiac plexus block (CPB). Used for upper abdominal pain – most commonly from pancreatic cancer. It is also appropriate for pain involving the GI tract from the distal third of the esophagus to the transverse colon, the liver and biliary tract, the adrenals, and mesentery. Superior hypogastric plexus block. Applicable to malignant pain of the gastrointestinal tract from the descending colon to the rectum, as well as the urogenital system. Ganglion impar block. Pain involving the rectum and perineum. Procedure For CPB, patients are positioned supine or prone, according to operator preference and patient comfort. Patients are intravenously hydrated and sedated. The skin and underlying tissues are infiltrated with local anesthesic. Neurolytic blocks are often preceded by local anesthetic blocks to assess adequacy of analgesic response before executing a neurodestructive procedure. In the palliative setting, local anesthetic blocks are often waived due to logistical and patient comfort issues. Neurolytic procedures are always performed under fluoroscopic, CT, or endoscopic ultrasound to minimize potential for damage to organs and spinal cord. Blocks are performed with ethyl alcohol (50-100%) or phenol (6-10%). Neurolytic blocks may provide several months of analgesia and may be repeated. Complications & Side Effects Side effects – referable to loss of sympathetic tone – include transient hypotension and increased intestinal motility. Complications include needle injury to visceral, neural, and vascular structures; pain at the injection site; and failure to obtain an analgesic response. Contraindications to these procedures include bleeding diathesis and local infection. Post-Procedural Management Crucial to the success of sympatholysis is proper patient selection and technical skill. Sympathetic blocks are not a panacea and generally do not obviate the need for ongoing pharmacological management of residual pain. However, they can substantially improve analgesia and quality of life, and may allow for opioid dosage reduction. Note: attempts at post-block opioid reduction should be done with care to avoid unmasking existing nociceptive/neuropathic pain and precipitating opioid withdrawal. References Waldman SD, ed. Interventional Pain Management. 2nd Edition. Philadelphia, PA: WB Saunders Company; 2001. De Leon-Casasola OA. Critical evaluation of chemical neurolysis of the sympathetic axis for cancer pain. Cancer Control. 2000; 7(2):142-148. Mercadante S, Nicosia F. Celiac plexus block: a reappraisal. Reg Anesth Pain Med. 1998; 23:37-48. Trans QHN, et al. Endoscopic ultrasound-guided celiac plexus neurolysis for pancreatic cancer pain: a single-institution experience and review of the literature. J Supportive Oncol. 2006; 4(9):460-464. Wang PJ, et al. CT-guided percutaneous neurolytic celiac plexus block technique. Abdominal Imaging. 2006; 31(6):710-718. Fast Facts and Concepts are edited by Drew A Rosielle MD, Palliative Care Center, Medical College of Wisconsin. For more information write to: drosiell@mcw.edu . More information, as well as the complete set of Fast Facts, are available at EPERC: www.eperc.mcw.edu . ACGME Competencies: Medical Knowledge, Patient Care Keyword(s): Pain – Opioids 
#098 Intrathecal Drug Therapy for Pain, 2nd ed Author(s): Gary M Reisfield MD and George R Wilson MD Background Intrathecal drug delivery can be an invaluable adjunct in the management of severe pain when meticulous application of conventional drug therapy proves ineffective or produces intolerable side effects. Intrathecal analgesia is distinguished from epidural analgesia by catheter location within the neuraxis (see Fast Fact #85 ). In the former, the catheter lies within the subarachnoid space, where small quantities of medication have direct access to spinal drug receptor sites. In the latter, larger doses of medication (necessitated by epidural fat and vascular uptake) must diffuse across the dura to reach these receptors. Epidural vs. Intrathecal Analgesia Potential advantages of intrathecal – relative to epidural – techniques are: Ease of catheter placement, particularly in the presence spinal pathology. Superior analgesia in the following settings: Presence of epidural pathology, e.g. metastatic disease, radiation fibrosis, vertebral compression. Widespread pain, multiple pain locations, and pain distant from catheter site, especially upper body. Pain poorly responsive to high-dose epidural therapy. Fewer catheter problems such as catheter migration or tip occlusion. Lower dose requirements may reduce side effects and lower drug costs. Choice of System There exists a spectrum of intrathecal system options – from a simple, percutaneous catheter/external pump to a totally implanted system. Choice is based on life expectancy, performance status, and available professional expertise. Pharmacoeconomic modeling suggests that the percutaneous catheter may be the most economic option for patients with prognoses of days to a few months. Drug Choice Arner and Arner (1985) demonstrated a relative responsiveness of pain mechanisms to intraspinal opioids as follows: continuous somatic pain > continuous visceral > intermittent somatic > intermittent visceral > neuropathic > cutaneous (ulcers or fistulas). An opioid alone is likely to be effective for nociceptive pain syndromes. The addition of coanalgesics, including local anesthetics and/or clonidine, is usually necessary for neuropathic pain syndromes. Ziconotide, a relatively new N-type calcium channel blocker, may have a role in pain syndromes refractory to traditional intrathecal opioids and coanalgesics. Frequency of adverse CNS effects (e.g. confusion, somnolence, dizziness), may be attenuated by slow titration. Experience with this drug in the palliative care setting is limited. Complications and Side Effects Complications may occur from a) the procedure (e.g. post-spinal headache), b) medications (e.g. opioid-related respiratory depression, sedation, urinary retention, pruritis), and c) hardware (e.g. catheter kinking/disconnection/dislodgement, infection). Major contraindications to intrathecal catheter placement include coagulopathy, infection at catheter insertion site, and sepsis. References Bennett G, Burchiel K, Buchser E, Classen A, Deer T, et al. Clinical guidelines for intraspinal infusion: report of an expert panel. J Pain Symptom Manage. 2000; 20 (2;suppl):S37-S43. Burton AW, Rajagopol A, Shah HN, et al. Epidural and intrathecal analgesia is effective in treating refractory cancer pain. Pain Medicine. 2004; 5(3):239-247. Ferrante FM. Neuraxial infusion in the management of cancer pain. Oncology. 1999; 13(5;suppl 2):30-36. Mercadante S. Problems of long-term spinal opioid treatment in advanced cancer patients. Pain. 1999; 79:1-13. Arner S, Arner B. Differential effects of epidural morphine in the treatment of cancer related pain. Acta Anesthesiol Scand. 1985; 29:32-36. Prommer E. Ziconotide: a new option for refractory pain. Drugs Today. 2006; 42(6):369-378. ACGME Competencies: Medical Knowledge, Patient Care Keyword(s): Ethics, Law, Policy Health Systems; Pain – Evaluation; Pain – Opioids 
#099 Chemotherapy: Response and Survival Data, 2nd ed Author(s): David E Weissman MD and Charles F von Gunten MD Background Key data in the decision process regarding chemotherapy include the response rate, median duration of response, and median survival, along with toxicity and quality of life information (see Fast Fact #14 ). The table below synthesizes data for several common cancers. The data were derived by reviewing standard oncology textbooks, along with a Medline search of recent relevant articles. Comments on the Response and Survival Data All data are for patients receiving chemotherapy for metastatic or locally advanced cancer (not receiving adjuvant or neoadjuvant chemotherapy). All data is for first-line, commercially available oral or IV chemotherapy or biological therapy (such as monoclonal antibodies). ‘Response Rate’ is defined as the percentage of complete and partial responders in a given trial, where ‘Partial Response’ = > 50% reduction in measurable tumor for one month. Response is typically determined after 2 cycles of treatment (usually one cycle every 21-28 days); however, patients who progress after 1 cycle will generally continue progressing after two. The data reflect mid-point ranges derived from the available clinical trials; most of the data represent combination chemotherapy trials. Note: for certain cancers, the benefit of combination vs. single agent therapy is not proven (e.g. pancreas, biliary, liver). This information is not representative of all cancer patients. The data represent the ‘best case’ outcome, from a population of patients who were in good enough health to participate in a clinical trial (e.g. ambulatory, good functional status). Actual responses and response durations for a non-clinical trial population will likely be poorer. Data for biliary, pancreas, esophagus and liver come from many small trials ( < 50 patients), thus the upper end figures are likely to be overestimated. Second-line chemotherapy, following disease progression from first-line treatment, can be expected to have a lower response rate and shorter duration of response. Median survival data includes both responders and non-responders; patients who respond to chemotherapy typically live longer than those who do not. Response Rate Median Duration of Response Median Survival Breast 25-55% 6-12 months 24-36 months Colon 25-35% 6-8 months 12-18 months Esophagus 30-50% 4-6 months 6-9 months Lung (Non-Small Cell) 20-30% 4-6 months 6-9 months Stomach 20-50% 4-6 months 6-12 months Melanoma 15-25% 4-6 months 6-9 months Pancreas 10-25% 3-5 months 6-9 months Liver (Hepatocellular) 5-15% 2-4 months 6-9 months Biliary (Cholangio) 15-25% 2-4 months 6-9 months References DeVita VT, et al, eds. Cancer: Principles and Practice of Oncology. 7th Edition. Philadelphia, PA: Lippincott Williams & Wilkins; 2005. Kufe DW, et al, eds. Holland-Frei Cancer Medicine. 7th Edition. Hamilton, Ontario: BC Decker; 2006. ACGME Competencies: Medical Knowledge, Patient Care Keyword(s): Non-Pain Symptoms and Syndromes; Prognosis 
#100 Megestrol Acetate for Cancer Anorexia/Cachexia Author(s): Mike Salacz MD Background Cachexia occurs in up to 80% of cancer patients. Abnormal weight loss (more than 5-10% of pre-morbid weight) results in significant physical and psychological morbidity and is an independent risk factor for early mortality. Attempts to treat anorexia with enteral (e.g. tube feeding) or parenteral feedings (e.g. total parenteral nutrition – see Fast Fact #190 ) have demonstrated limited efficacy, at the price of increased morbidity. This Fast Fact discusses megestrol acetate, a synthetic progestin, which has been extensively studied as an appetite stimulant. Outcome Data Clinical trials have demonstrated that megestrol is: Equally efficacious to dexamethasone as an appetite stimulant. Superior to dronabinol (see Fast Fact #93 ) in appetite stimulation and non-fluid weight gain. Effective, when used concurrently with radiation therapy in lung or head and neck cancer to reduce treatment associated weight loss. Associated with fewer side effects than corticosteroids. However, despite these apparent benefits, available data suggest that weight gain is largely adipose tissue (not lean muscle) and only one study has demonstrated a quality of life benefit. No study has shown a survival advantage. Overall only 20-30% of advanced cancer patients will have a significant response (weight gain > 5%), with a median time to response of 6-8 weeks. Dosing The optimal timing to initiate treatment with megestrol (prophylactic or therapeutic) and the optimal duration of therapy are unknown. Megestrol is dosed orally, once daily. There is an increasing dose/response curve from 160 to 800 mg/day; doses above 800mg/day have no additional benefit. Different strategies include beginning at 400mg per day and titrating for effect to 800 mg/day. Alternatively, dosing can begin at 800 mg/day. Generally, megestrol is dosed in the elixir form both for patient convenience and cost (see below). Megestrol is 60-80% excreted in urine; no guidelines are available for dosing in renal impairment. Costs (AWP = average wholesale price) Tablet: 20 mg (AWP = $69/100 pills); 40 tablets = 800 mg = $27.60/day. 40 mg (AWP = $117/100 pills); 20 tablets = 800 mg = $23.50/day Elixir: 40 mg/ml (AWP = $144/480ml) = 20ml = 800 mg = $6/day Side Effects Side effects are mild, but can include thromboembolic events (use with caution in patients with history thromboembolism), adrenal suppression with insufficiency upon abrupt discontinuation, hypertension, hyperglycemia, breakthrough uterine bleeding and skin photosensitivity. References Inui A. Cancer anorexia-cachexia syndrome: current issues in research and management. CA Cancer J Clin. 2002; 52:72-91. Jatoi A. On appetite and its loss. J Clin Oncol. 2003; 21(9, Suppl):S79-S81. Jatoi A. Dronabinol versus megestrol acetate versus combination therapy for cancer-associated anorexia: a North Central Cancer Treatment Group study. J Clin Oncol, 2002; 20:567-73. McQuellon RP. Supportive use of megestrol acetate with head/neck and lung cancer patients receiving radiation therapy. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys. 2002; 52:1180-5. Tisdale MJ. Biology of Cachexia. J Natl Cancer Inst. 1997; 89:1763-73. ACGME Competencies: Medical Knowledge, Patient Care, Practice-Based Learning and Improvement Keyword(s): Non-Pain Symptoms and Syndromes 
#101 Insomnia: Patient Assessment 2nd Edition Authors Robert Arnold MD, Michael Miller, and Rohtesh Mehta MD MPH Background Sleep disorders are very common in the general population, the elderly, and in terminally ill patients. Sleep deprivation causes reduced tolerance to pain and increased fatigue that prevents patients from participating in meaningful daytime activities and decreasing their quality of life. This Fast Fact focuses on the assessment of insomnia; it is the first of a series of three Fast Facts about insomnia (see #104, 105). Definitions Primary Insomnia: difficulty initiating or maintaining sleep, or non-restorative sleep, for at least 1 month; does not occur exclusively during another mental disorder; is not due to the direct physiological effects of a substance/medication or a general medical condition; and significantly impairs functional/social quality of life. [ DSM-IV-TR Diagnostic Criteria 307.42 ]. The International Classification of Sleep Disorders (ICSD-2) classifies insomnias into various categories: Acute/Adjustment Insomnia: Usually related to an acute physical/psycho-social stressor, change in environment; is short-term, expected to resolve when stressor disappears, usually lasts less than 3 months. Idiopathic Insomnia / Life-Long Insomnia: Begins during infancy or childhood, etiology is unknown; patients may have learning disabilities. Psychological Insomnia/Conditioned/Learned Insomnia: Caused by an acute event such as a significant life stress, pain, or illness; the individual no longer associates the bed with sleeping. Paradoxical Insomnia / Pseudo-insomnia / Sleep Hypochondriasis: Subjective feeling of insomnia, with no polysomnographic evidence of a sleep disorder. Inadequate Sleep Hygiene: Related to irregular sleep schedule, consumption of caffeinated beverages, nicotine or alcohol, or exercise before bed-time. Circadian Rhythm Sleep Disorders: Jet lag and shift-work. Parasomnia: a disruptive physical act that occurs during sleep or during sleep–wake transitions which may cause awakening or other disturbance in sleep. It includes nightmare disorder, sleep terror disorder, sleepwalking disorder and other parasomnias. Sleep Apnea: cessation of breathing for short periods during sleep; can be obstructive or central in origin. Restless Legs Syndrome (RLS) : a disorder characterized by paresthesias and dysesthesias of the legs that typically occur in the evening or at night and may be relieved by movement (see Fast Fact #217). Periodic Limb Movement Syndrome (PLMS): involuntary, rhythmic twitches, typically ankle dorsiflexion, occurring every 20–40 seconds, leading to brief arousals and accidental kicking of bedmates although patients are not consciously aware. In contrast to RLS, PLMS occurs during sleep. Narcolepsy: a disorder of excessive daytime fatigue associated with abnormalities in rapid-eye-movement sleep. Sleep History Obtain a focused sleep history from the patient and bed partner. If needed, the patient should be asked to record their daily sleep patterns in a sleep log for one week; see http://www.webmd.com/sleep-disorders/guide/how-to-use-a-sleep-diary . Sleep hygiene . Has the patient altered their bedtime routine (e.g. change in bedtime, use of sleep aids, lying in bed watching TV prior to sleep)? Sleep chronology . Evaluate the onset, pattern and duration of sleep and whether the insomnia is transient, intermittent or persistent. A persistent problem usually is a consequence of a medical, neurologic or psychiatric disorder. Ask if the patient has difficulty initiating sleep, staying asleep, or both. Sleep apnea rarely causes disorders in initiating sleep. Nightmares (see Fast Fact #88) cause difficulty staying asleep and may reflect spiritual suffering. Ask about multiple nocturnal or early morning awakenings. Frequent awakening is often due to medicine and early awakening is classically due to depression. Sleep environment . Are any environmental factors (e.g. noise, light, odors) preventing sleep? This may be particularly important in the hospital or a situation where a patient has moved into an unfamiliar setting (e.g. children’s house). Physical symptoms . Are there physical symptoms interfering with sleep (e.g. cough, pain, dyspnea)? Symptoms occurring just prior to sleep may reflect primary sleep disorders. Medical conditions . Are there co-morbid medical conditions that are associated with insomnia? Worsening of chronic medical conditions (e.g. CHF, COPD). New onset or worsening depression and/or anxiety. Drugs (e.g. steroids, beta blockers, psychostimulants); use of alcohol and caffeine, especially in the evening. Restless leg syndrome or periodic limb movements in sleep (see above). Spiritual concerns . Fears about dying may cause a patient to be afraid of falling asleep or to not want to turn off the lights; this is especially common in patients with dyspnea. This is in contradistinction to more typical insomnia where the patient is bothered by the lack of sleep. References Ohayon MM, Reynolds CF 3 rd . Epidemiological and clinical relevance of insomnia diagnosis algorithms according to the DSM-IV and the International Classification of Sleep Disorders (ICSD). Sleep Med . 2009; 10(9):952-60. International Classification of Sleep Disorders: Diagnostic and Coding Manual. 2nd ed, American Academy of Sleep Medicine, Westchester, IL; 2005. Bonnet MH, Arand DL. Diagnostic evaluation of insomnia. UpToDate ; 2009. Schenck C, Mahowald M, Salk R. Assessment and management of insomnia. JAMA. 2003; 289(19):2475-2463. Bloom HG, Ahmed I, Alessi CA, et al. Evidence-based recommendations for the assessment and management of sleep disorders in older persons. J Am Geriatr Soc . 2009; 57(5):761-89. Author Affiliations: University of Pittsburgh Medical Center, Pittsburgh, PA. ACGME Competencies: Medical Knowledge, Patient Care Keyword(s): Non-Pain Symptoms and Syndromes 
#102 Highly Active Antiretroviral Therapy and Hospice Author(s): Mitchell Cohen MD and Gregg VandeKieft MD, MA Background There is ample information on when to initiate highly active antiretroviral therapy (HAART) but there is little guidance on counseling patients about when to discontinue HAART as the end of life nears (see Fast Facts #213 and #214 on prognostication in HIV/AIDS. As more HIV/AIDS patients die from conditions such as liver failure or cancer – that is, dying with rather than from HIV/AIDS – decisions regarding the role of HAART at the end of life become more complex. A simple curative vs. palliative care paradigm is inadequate; the decision involves a nuanced discussion of HAART’s potential impact on quality of life within the context of the patient’s prognosis and goals of therapy. Simply put, as patients with HIV/AIDS get closer to death, the potential benefits of HAART diminish relative to treatment burden. The following is a review of HAART benefits/burdens near the end-of- life. Benefits Prevention of a retroviral syndrome. In one cohort study, over a third of patients who discontinued HAART experienced symptoms related to discontinuation (1). However, the onset of symptoms is often 1-2 months after discontinuation of HAART, and the majority of patients do not experience symptoms, so this potential benefit should be balanced by considerations of treatment burden and life expectancy. Treatment of syndromes or symptoms affected by viral load or viral ‘fitness.’ The severity of HIV-related neuropathy, and constitutional symptoms such as fatigue or weight loss, correlate directly to viral load (2). HAART may relieve or prevent symptoms by reducing the viral load or by changing the virus’s fitness. Prevention of opportunistic infections. HAART reduces the incidence of opportunistic infections that impact the quality of life of patients with AIDS. In one prospective cohort study of patients with advanced HIV disease, there was a 66% reduction in the number of new non-CMV opportunistic events with HAART (3). HAART’s primary mechanism is decreasing viral load; however, HAART can also directly inhibit opportunistic organisms – e.g. inhibition of candidal virulence factors by protease inhibitors (4). Again, the potential for benefit will depend on the extent of the patient’s disease and existing co-morbidities. Delay the progression of AIDS Dementia Complex (ADC). Since ADC seems to be triggered by HIV replication, HAART is a key element in slowing progression. While the optimal antiretroviral therapy is not known, zidovudine has been shown in placebo controlled trials to be of benefit (5,6). Hope for a positive treatment effect. While it is difficult to objectively demonstrate improved outcomes based on psychological effects of continuing HAART, some clinicians and many patients find it difficult to not equate discontinuation of HAART with “giving up.” Finding the most appropriate means to achieve treatment goals often requires exploration of fundamental notions such as how the patient defines “hope” and how treatment goals will be served by a change in therapy. Burdens Cost. The high cost of these medications is a significant strain to a hospice system’s budget (typical regimen costs $250-500/ week). Since the role of HAART near the end of life is uncertain, hospice agencies may decide to decline payment. In some instances, patients may be admitted into hospice care for an alternate terminal diagnosis such as liver failure and remain eligible for medication coverage by their primary insurer, separate from their hospice benefit. A few patients can afford HAART meds out-of-pocket. Frequently, patients are forced to choose between hospice care and continuing HAART. Side effects. Treatment with HAART is not benign. GI intolerance, headache, and fatigue accompany most antiretrovials. Didanosine may precipitate gout and pancreatitis; zidovudine myopathy; zalcitabine (ddC) peripheral neuropathy, stomatitis, and arthralgias; efavirenz and lamivudine depression and or anxiety. Pill burden. In a study of male veterans with a variety of chronic medical problems, perception of over-medication was associated with decreased quality of life (7). Summary The decision to discontinue antiretroviral therapy for hospice patients with AIDS should be a part of comprehensive palliative care; how HAART serves the patient’s overall goals for care should be the primary consideration. Facilitating an informed discussion of benefits and burdens of HAART is an important means to help patients achieve their goals. References Ahdieh GL, Silverberg MJ, Palacio H, et al. Discontinuation of potent antiretroviral therapy: predictive value of and impact on CD4 cell counts and HIV RNA levels. AIDS. 2001;15(16):2101-2108. Simpson D, Haidich AB, Schifitto G, et al. Severity of HIV-associated neuropathy is associated with plasma HIV-1 RNA levels. AIDS. 2002; 16:407-412. Murphy EL, Collier AC, Kalish LA, et al. Highly active antiretroviral therapy decreases mortality and morbidity in patients with advanced HIV disease. Ann Inter Med. 2001; 135(1):17-26. Munro CA, Hube B. Anti-fungal therapy at the HAART of viral therapy. Trends Microbiol. 2002; 10(4):173-177. Clifford, DB. AIDS dementia. Med Clin N Am. 2002; 86:537-550. Sidtis JJ, Gatsonis C, Price RW, et al. Zidovudine treatment of the AIDS dementia complex: results of a placebo controlled trial. Ann Neurol. 1993; 33:343-349. Fincke BG, Miller DR, Spiro A. The interaction of patient perception of overmedication with drug compliance and side effects. J Gen Inter Med. 1998; 13(3):182-185. ACGME Competencies: Medical Knowledge, Patient Care, Systems-Based Practice Keyword(s): Ethics, Law, Policy Health Systems 
#103 Oral Transmucosal Fentanyl Citrate, 2nd ed Author(s): Debra Gordon RN, MS, FAAN and Mark Schroeder MD Introduction Oral transmucosal fentanyl citrate (OTFC, Actiq TM ) is a solid formulation of fentanyl that resembles a lozenge on a handle. It is intended for oral transmucosal administration. Fentanyl is also available as an oravescent buccal tablet (Fentora TM ) – this product is dosed differently than OTFC and should not be used interchangeably with it . This Fast Fact only discusses OTFC (Actiq TM ). Indications OTFC is indicated for breakthrough cancer pain in patients already receiving and who are tolerant (receiving at least equivalent of 60 mg oral morphine per 24 hours) to opioid therapy for underlying persistent cancer pain. Pharmacology Compared to morphine and hydromorphone fentanyl is a lipid-soluble opioid and, when placed in saliva under normal conditions of the mouth, is 80% non-ionized making it the only opioid suitable for transmucosal absorption. Fentanyl is ~ 100 times more potent than morphine. However, bioavailability of OTFC depends on the fraction of the dose that is absorbed through the oral mucosa (~25%) and the fraction that is swallowed (~75%; but swallowed dose is only partially bioavailable). OTFC can produce a rapid onset of analgesia, even during unit consumption (fentanyl begins to cross the blood-brain barrier in as little as 3-5 minutes), with peak effect at 20-40 minutes after the start of administration. Total duration of activity is 2 to 3 hours. The amount of fentanyl absorbed from each single dose remains stable over multiple administrations. This fact, combined with fentanyl's short half-life, reduces the risk of a cumulative increase in serum level with repetitive doses. Prescribing Information OTFC is available in 200, 400, 600, 800, 1200, & 1600 mcg dosage strengths. Do not substitute ACTIQ TM on a mcg per mcg basis for other oral fentanyl products including the oravescent buccal tablet (Fentora™). OTFC should always be started at 200 mcg dose and then individually titrated based on patient response; there is no correlation/conversion factor for OTFC and the patient’s existing opioid requirement. If the first 200 mcg dose is inadequate, the patient should wait for 15 minutes (30 minutes after start of first unit) and take a second unit. If pain is relieved after the second dose of 200 mcg, the dose to use for the next episode of breakthrough pain would be 400 mcg. The patient should be instructed not to take more than two units per pain episode during the initial titration period. OTFC has typical opioid dose-related side effects: somnolence, nausea, and dizziness. Patient Information Consumption Technique and Storage Place unit next to buccal mucosa, between cheek and gum, moving the unit gently side to side. 15 minutes is the ideal amount of time to consume a unit to achieve the desired onset and peak effect. OTFC units are designed for one time administration. Patients should be instructed to remove the unit from their mouth if excessive opioid-related side effects develop. The following factors will decrease transmucosal absorption: Reduced saliva. Use of liquids that reduce oral pH prior to OTFC administration (coffee, cola, fruit juices). Placement of OTFC on tongue or gums (lowered absorption at these sites). Chewing OTFC. Instruct patients to utilize the manufacturer’s safety containers to store the dosage units, and discard any unused portion of the OTFC by dissolving it under hot tap water. Partially used units should not be stored and re-used. The drug should be stored at room temperature, and not be frozen. The Average Wholesale Price is $564 for thirty 200 mcg lozenges. This Fast Fact was adapted with permission from the University of Wisconsin Hospital & Clinics, Madison, WI Pain Patient Care Team ‘Pain Management Fast Facts – 5 Minute Inservice’ series. References Fine PG, Streisand JB. A review of oral transmucosal fentanyl citrate: potent, rapid and noninvasive opioid analgesia. J Palliat Med. 1998; 1:55-63. Portenoy RK, Payne R, Coluzzi P, et al. Oral transmucosal fentanyl citrate (OTFC) for the treatment of breakthrough pain in cancer patients: a controlled dose titration study. Pain. 1999; 79: 303-312. Physicians Desk Reference 2003. Montvale, NJ: Thomson Healthcare; 2003. ACGME Competencies: Medical Knowledge, Patient Care Keyword(s): Pain – Opioids 
#104 Insomnia: Non-Pharmacologic Treatments, 2nd Edition Authors: Robert Arnold MD, Michael Miller, and Rohtesh Mehta, MD MPH Introduction This Fast Fact addresses non-pharmacologic therapies for insomnia; Fast Fact #101 discusses patient assessment and #105 discusses pharmacologic treatment of insomnia. Non-Specific Treatments Improving Sleep Hygiene Sleep hygiene education should be provided to anyone with insomnia. First, there is no arbitrary rule for how much someone should sleep. Generally, older patients need less sleep. Second, patients should be advised to keep a regular sleep schedule; this means going to bed and getting up at the same time. Third, patients should avoid long daytime naps, alcohol, and caffeine. These principles may be difficult for seriously ill patients, particularly maintaining a regular routine for hospitalized patients and avoiding naps for fatigued, seriously ill patients. Behavioral Treatments Relaxation therapies : The patient can be taught to use various relaxation techniques just prior to bedtime such as progressive muscle relaxation, guided imagery, meditation, diaphragmatic breathing or hypnosis (see Fast Fact #211). Stimulus control therapy : This focuses on establishing a connection between the bed and sleep. It emphasizes not watching TV, reading in bed, or using bedroom for any other activity (except sexual activity). Sleep restriction therapy : This therapy requires patient motivation as it involves restricting the time allowed in bed depending upon the actual time spent in bed over the past 2 weeks and then going to bed 15 minutes earlier every night (increased weekly) until the target bedtime is achieved. Sleep compression therapy is a variant of sleep restriction but the reduction is sleep is made gradually. Cognitive behavioral therapy : This is a multi-component psychotherapy, and includes sleep restriction, stimulus control and cognitive therapy which focuses on identifying unwanted feelings or thoughts and replacing them with more positive thoughts. It is effective in treating chronic insomnia in the general population, in patients with chronic pain, and in women with metastatic breast cancer. The last two therapies are the only evidence-based psychological treatments for insomnia in older adults. Physical Exercises : Although the data is limited, studies in elderly patients suggest significantly improved sleep duration and onset latency and minimal enhancement in sleep efficiency with community-based endurance training programs such as low impact aerobics, brisk walking, and Tai Chi Chih. Choosing which therapy to use first depends mainly on provider experience and patient motivation. It is difficult to know how long non-pharmacologic therapy should be tried before attempting other measures. This depends on the patient , the severity of the insomnia , or the severity of the illness. Many studies which showed cognitive behavioral therapy to be effective used a treatment regimen of 7-8 weeks. Specific Treatments Obstructive sleep apnea is treated with positive airway pressure (e.g., ‘CPAP’) ventilation at night. Although some patients report difficulty becoming accustomed to sleeping with the CPAP mask on, this therapy can dramatically improve symptoms. Surgery is sometimes indicated for obstructive sleep apnea. Symptoms from an underlying medical disorder can also contribute to insomnia. Adequately treating a patient’s pain, nausea and vomiting (See Fast Fact #5), or dyspnea (See Fast Fact #27) should improve sleep. Spiritual and existential concerns can be an important cause of insomnia in palliative care patients. Patients may be able to avoid these concerns during the day through the distraction of daily activities but have difficulty ignoring them at night. Thus, it is important to directly address a patient’s spiritual concerns, worries, and fears about dying during the day. Brief psychotherapy may be helpful. References Montgomery P, Dennis JA. Cognitive behavioural interventions for sleep problems in adults aged 60+. Cochrane Database of Systematic Reviews 2003 , Issue 1. Art. No.: CD003161. DOI: 10.1002/14651858.CD003161. Montgomery P, Dennis JA. Physical exercise for sleep problems in adults aged 60+. Cochrane Database of Systematic Reviews 2002, Issue 4. Art. No.: CD003404. DOI: 10.1002/14651858.CD003404. McCurry SM, Logsdon RG, Teri L, Vitiello MV. Evidence-based psychological treatments for insomnia in older adults. Psychol Aging . 2007;22(1):18-27 Quesnel C, et al. Efficacy of cognitive-behavioral therapy for insomnia in women treated for nonmetastatic breast cancer . J Consulting Clinical Psych. 2003; 71(1):189-200. Jungquist CR, O'Brien C, Matteson-Rusby S, et al. The efficacy of cognitive-behavioral therapy for insomnia in patients with chronic pain. Sleep Med. 2010 Feb 2 Irwin MR, Olmstead R, Motivala SJ. Improving sleep quality in older adults with moderate sleep complaints: A randomized controlled trial of Tai Chi Chih. Sleep . 2008;31(7):1001-8. Author Affiliations: University of Pittsburgh Medical Center, Pittsburgh, PA. ACGME Competencies: Medical Knowledge, Patient Care Keyword(s): Non-Pain Symptoms and Syndromes 
#105 Insomnia: Pharmacological Therapies 2nd Edition Authors Robert Arnold MD, Michael Miller, and Rohtesh Mehta MD MPH Introduction Fast Facts #101 and #104 reviewed assessment of insomnia and its non-pharmacological therapy. This Fast Fact focuses on the pharmacological treatment of insomnia. Prior to pharmacological treatment, it is important to improve sleep hygiene and treat any contributing underlying medical conditions (e.g. depression, pain, worsening CHF or COPD). Non-Specific Drug Treatment: Benzodiazepines have been successfully used for short term insomnia as they improve sleep quality, total sleep time and reduce night-time awakenings, although there are no systematic studies on long-term use and rare studies in palliative care. All drugs are dosed orally, at bedtime. Most commonly used (and FDA approved) are temazepam (start 7.5 mg), estazolam (0.5 mg), triazolam (0.125 mg), quazepam (7.5 mg) and flurazepam (15 mg). The first two are medium half-life benzodiazepines (10-24 hours); triazolam has a shorter half-life ( < 6 hours), quazepam and flurazepam are longer lasting (half-life up to 3-7 days in elderly). All of these undergo hepatic metabolism via cytochrome P450 system (except temazepam which is cleared renally) and thus have numerous drug-drug interactions. Flurazepam and triazolam have active metabolites. Benzodiazepines have a high incidence of amnesia and rebound insomnia, particularly in anxious patients, and may cause paradoxical agitation, increased risk of falls, hip fractures and cognitive impairment, especially in the elderly. Other side effects include tolerance and dependence with long-term use and additive CNS and respiratory side effects when used with other drugs. Benzodiazepine receptor agonists . These are rapidly absorbed, metabolized by the liver, do not have active metabolites, have low abuse potential and do not cause rebound insomnia upon abrupt discontinuation. Zolpidem (5-10 mg) and Zaleplon (10-20 mg), both dosed at bedtime, are ultra-short acting agents (half-life 1-2 hours) that restore sleep in patients with nocturnal awakenings, while eszopiclone (1-2 mg) has a half-life of 6-9 hours. Zolpidem is available in a controlled-release formulation. Antidepressants such as trazodone (25-100 mg), doxepin (10-50 mg), amitriptyline (10 -50 mg), imipramine (10-75 mg), and mirtazapine (5-15 mg) are commonly used for insomnia due to their sedative properties, however the evidence for their use is less convincing. Atypical antipsychotics. Most of the atypical antipsychotics (quetiapine, olanzapine and ziprasidone), except for risperidone, improve total sleep time and/or sleep efficiency in healthy subjects and schizophrenic patients. These may be beneficial in patients with insomnia who do not respond to front-line treatment or insomnia in medically ill patients with delirium. Miscellaneous sedative hypnotic s. Choral Hydrate has moderate short term efficacy but is more toxic than benzodiazepines. Barbiturates are effective in short term treatment, but tolerance develops rapidly. Once commonly used for insomnia, these drugs are no longer used except in rare circumstances. Antihistamines and over-the-counter drugs. Diphenhydramine or other classical anti-histamines have sedative properties, but they are generally not preferred in the elderly due to anticholinergic properties and drug interactions. Diphenhydramine (25-100 mg) has been shown to increase sleep duration but not quality (as it does not affect sleep architecture). Its half-life is ~5-10 hours, but is much longer in elderly. Most over the counter products contain diphenhydramine or a similar sedating antihistamine, including products such as Unisom, Tylenol PM, and Nyquil. Melatonin is used for circadian rhythm sleep disorders and is less effective for chronic insomnia. It has short half-life (45-60 min), has been used in doses ranging from 0.3 to 20 mg, is not FDA approved, and does not have any significant effects on either sleep onset latency or sleep efficiency. Melatonin receptor agonists include ramelteon, tasimelteon and agomelatine. Ramelteon (8 mg) is FDA approved, has a half-life of 1–2.6 hours; has been shown to reduce sleep latency and increased total sleep time in patients more than 65 years old with chronic insomnia. Side effects are similar to that of placebo and include headache, somnolence and sore throat. Its primary advantage is that there is no evidence of abuse and dependence, rebound insomnia, or withdrawal effects. Herbal remedies. Preliminary and conflicting evidence suggest that valerian (oral extract 400-900 mg QHS) may be as effective as mild hypnotics. The major side effects are hepatotoxicity, cardiotoxicity and delirium. Evidence is lacking for other medications like kava kava, L-tryptophan, chamomile, St. John’s wort and Jamaican dogwood. Drugs for specific sleep disorders: See Fast Fact #217 for treatment of Restless leg syndrome. Discussion of therapies for narcolepsy and nocturnal myoclonus or periodic leg movements is beyond the scope of this Fast Fact. References Hirst A, Sloan R. Benzodiazepines and related drugs for insomnia in palliative care. Cochrane Database of Systematic Reviews 2001, Issue 4. Art. No.: CD003346. DOI: 10.1002/14651858.CD003346. Schenck CH, Mahowald MW, Sack RL. Assessment and management of insomnia . JAMA. 2003; 289:2475-2479. Cohrs S. Sleep disturbances in patients with schizophrenia: impact and effect of antipsychotics. CNS Drugs. 2008; 22(11):939-62. Wine JN, Sanda C, Caballero J. Effects of quetiapine on sleep in nonpsychiatric and psychiatric conditions. Ann Pharmacother. 2009; 43(4):707-13. Buscemi N, Vandermeer B, Hooton N, et al. Efficacy and safety of exogenous melatonin for secondary sleep disorders and sleep disorders accompanying sleep restriction: meta-analysis. BMJ . 2006; 332(7538):385-93. Roth T, Seiden D, Sainati S, et al. Effects of ramelteon on patient-reported sleep latency in older adults with chronic insomnia . Sleep Med. 2006; 7(4):312-8. Meolie AL, Rosen C, Kristo D. Oral nonprescription treatment for insomnia: an evaluation of products with limited evidence. J Clin Sleep Med. 2005; 1(2):173-87. Author Affiliations: University of Pittsburgh Medical Center, Pittsburgh, PA. ACGME Competencies: Medical Knowledge, Patient Care Keyword(s): Non-Pain Symptoms and Syndromes 
#106 Controlled Sedation for Refractory Suffering - Part I Author(s): Michael E Salacz MD and David E Weissman MD Introduction Controlled Sedation for Refractory Suffering (also known as ‘total,’ ‘palliative,’ or ‘terminal’ sedation) can be defined as sedation for intractable distress in the dying. The use of sedation has been reported to be anywhere from 2-50% of hospice patients. Muller-Busch reported the indications for sedation included: anxiety/psychological distress (40%), dyspnea (35%) and delirium/agitation (14%). This Fast Fact reviews the medical decision-making surrounding these practices; Fast Fact #107 reviews techniques. Existential Suffering While there exist objective criteria for quantifying and treating physical distress, evaluating psychological distress (e.g. ’existential suffering’) is more difficult. There are no simple and clinically oriented tools to evaluate spiritual and psychosocial components of mental suffering. Many clinicians find the idea of sedation for existential suffering to be ethically more challenging than similar treatment for physical suffering. In either case, the decision to begin a trial of sedation is always difficult for clinicians, requiring thorough patient assessment and discussions with the patient, family and other team members. Ethical/Legal Basis In the United States, Supreme Court rulings (Vacco v. Quill, 1997 and Washington v. Glucksberg, 1997) supported the concept of sedation when used to relieve intractable suffering. However, controversy still surrounds the use of sedation due to confusion with euthanasia. From an ethical and legal standpoint, the key difference is intent. In euthanasia the intent is to produce a hastened death. In sedation, the intent is to relieve intractable suffering, not hasten death. Of note, recent studies have found no difference in survival between hospice patients who required sedation for intractable symptom control during their last days and those who did not. What is a refractory/intractable symptom? Cherney and Portenoy clarified the distinction between a difficult vs. a refractory symptom. A refractory symptom, one for which total sedation may be appropriate, should have the following three attributes: Aggressive efforts short of sedation fail to provide relief. Additional invasive/non-invasive treatments are incapable of providing relief. Additional therapies are associated with excessive/unacceptable morbidity, or are unlikely to provide relief with a reasonable time frame. Guidelines Several similar sedation guidelines have been published; listed below are Rousseau’s guidelines for sedation in patients with existential suffering. These guidelines would also be appropriate for decisions concerning physical symptoms. The patient must have a terminal illness. All palliative treatments must be exhausted, including treatment for depression, delirium, anxiety, etc. Psychological assessment by a skilled clinician. Spiritual assessment by a skilled clinician or clergy. A do-not-resuscitate order must be in effect and informed consent obtained and documented. Nutrition/hydration issues need to be addressed prior to sedation. Respite Sedation One additional consideration proposed by Rousseau and others is the concept of Respite Sedation – a time limited trial (usually 24-48 hours) in an attempt to break a cycle of psychological suffering. References Cherny NI. The use of sedation in the management of refractory pain. Principles and practice of supportive oncology Updates. 2000; 3:1-11. Cherny NI, Portenoy RK. Sedation in the management of refractory symptoms: guidelines for evaluation and treatment. J Pal. Care. 1994; 10::31-38. Cherny, NI. Commentary: sedation in response to refractory existential distress: walking the fine line, J Pain Symptom Manage. 1998; 16(6):404-5. Charter S, et al. Sedation for intractable distress in the dying-a survey of experts. Pall Med. 1998; 12:255-269. Braun TC, et al. Development of a clinical practice guideline for palliative sedation. J Pall Med. 2003; 6:345-350. Hallenbeck J. Terminal sedation for intractable distress. West J Med. 1999; 171(4):222-3. Muller-Busch H, et al. Sedation in palliative care – a critical analysis of 7 years experience. BMC Palliative Care. 2003; 2(1):2. Rousseau P. Existential suffering and palliative sedation: a brief commentary with a proposal for clinical guidelines. Am J Hosp Palliat Care. 2001; 18(3):151-3. ACGME Competencies: Interpersonal and Communication Skills, Medical Knowledge, Patient Care Keyword(s): Ethics, Law, Policy Health Systems, Non-Pain Symptoms and Syndromes 
#107 Controlled Sedation for Refractory Suffering - Part II Author(s): Michael E Salacz MD and David E Weissman MD Introduction Fast Fact #106 reviewed the decision process and clinical guidelines for controlled sedation for refractory suffering at the end-of-life. This Fast Fact will review sedation techniques. Prior to Initiating Sedation Ensure thorough discussion of proposed treatment plan and expected outcomes with patient (if able), all family members, and all medical staff (physicians, nurses, therapists, nursing aides, chaplain, etc.). Review plans for use of artificial nutrition/hydration—ensure treatment plan has been discussed (either stopping or continuing) and documented with patient/family and medical team. Document informed consent discussion and write DNR order. Assure a peaceful, quiet setting, with a minimum of intrusions. Confirm any specific goals that need to be met prior to starting sedation (e.g. visit from distant relative). Confirm patient/family desire for chaplain/spiritual support prior to starting sedation. Review medication and treatment orders—discontinue orders not contributing to comfort (e.g. vital sign monitoring, blood glucose checks). Starting Sedation Many drugs have been used to provide effective sedation; there are no controlled trials comparing efficacy. Midazolam, other benzodiazepines, barbiturates and propafol all have efficacy as sedatives. Although many patients are on opioids prior to the initiation of palliative sedation, opioids are not effective at producing sustained sedation. However, opioids should be continued, along with the sedating drug, to avoid opioid withdrawal and to treat unobserved pain. The following lists starting doses for the use of sedating drugs including the bolus dose and a starting continuous infusion (CI) rate. The CI rate can be increased as needed to achieve the desired level of sedation. (Note: SC = subcutaneous, gtt = drip rate.) Midazolam (SC, IV): 5 mg bolus, 1 mg/hr gtt. Lorazepam (SC, IV): 2-5 mg bolus, 0.5-1.0 mg/hr gtt. Thiopental (IV): 5-7 mg/kg/hr bolus, then 20-80 mg/hr gtt. Pentobarbital (IV): 1-3 mg/kg bolus, 1 mg/kg/hr gtt; Phenobarbital (IV, SC): 200 mg bolus (can repeat q10-15 min), then 25 mg/hr gtt. Propofol (IV): 20-50 mg bolus (may repeat), 5-10 mg/hr gtt. Continued Sedation Current hospital monitoring standards for conscious sedation are inappropriate in the dying patient. A general rule is that the depth of sedation can vary, depending on the symptoms being palliated, and prior discussions with the family regarding goals of treatment. Generally, the infusion is initiated and then titrated to a point where the patient appears to be comfortable. Care should be taken to make further adjustments when necessary to facilitate palliative nursing care. Other reported strategies include varying the depth of sedation during the day, providing deeper sedation at night to ensure peaceful rest. Once total sedation is initiated, survival can be quite variable, but generally is brief. Muller-Busch reports survival of 63 +/- 58 hrs after initiation of sedation, Sykes reports 56% of patients survived less than 48 hrs. References Berger AM, et al, eds. Principles and Practice of Palliative Care and Supportive Oncology. Philadelphia, PA: Lippincott Williams & Wilkins; 2002. Hallenbeck J, Terminal sedation for intractable distress. West J Med. 1999; 171(4): 222-3. Muller-Busch H, et al. Sedation in palliative care – a critical analysis of 7 years experience. BMC Palliative Care. 2003; 2(1):2. Quill TE. Responding to intractable terminal suffering: the role of terminal sedation and voluntary refusal of food and fluids. Ann Intern Med. 2000; 132:408-414. Sykes N. Sedative use in the last week of life and the implications for end-of-life decision making. Arch Intern Med. 2003; 163:341-344. ACGME Competencies: Medical Knowledge, Patient Care Keyword(s): Non-Pain Symptoms and Syndromes 
#108 Music Therapy Author(s): Brooke Rossi and Robert Arnold MD What is Music Therapy? Music therapy uses the properties of music – sounds, rhythm, and personal attachment and universality of songs – for psychosocial and spiritual support and to complement other palliative care treatments. Who are Music Therapists? Most music therapists have Bachelor and Masters Degrees in music therapy and receive training in music, behavioral science, and basic medical knowledge. They are certified by the Certification Board for Music Therapists (CBMT). Those who pass the national music therapy certification examination earn the credential ‘Music Therapist-Board Certified’ (MT-BC). What do Music Therapists Do? Music therapists develop specific treatment goals based on the patient and family’s input and feedback from the multidisciplinary team. Techniques include singing, listening to music, playing instruments, lyric analysis, music-prompted reminiscence, songwriting, improvisation, and guided imagery with music. What are the Indications and Contraindications for Music Therapy? Depression, anger, pain, anxiety, insomnia, nausea/ vomiting, boredom, loneliness, and confusion can be treated with music therapy; the only contraindication is patient preference. What Type of Patient Benefits From Music Therapy? Music therapy significantly improved the quality-of-life of cancer patients compared to a control group not receiving music therapy; the benefits persisted as illness progressed. Pediatric patients may benefit from music therapy; music brings normalcy to an ill child’s otherwise complicated life. They may be able to play or hear their favorite songs or continue playing instruments they played before they became sick. How Does Music Therapy Impact Quality of Life? Providing a basis for life review and reminiscence. Providing a means for relating to others. Distraction from physical pain and discomfort. Providing emotional comfort and relief from anxiety. Providing an enjoyable experience. Providing relief in the last hours of life. Are there Side Effects? Music may unintentionally resurface negative feelings from the past; these can be addressed by working with the music therapist. How is Music Therapy Paid for? Most music therapy is not billed to insurance. Therapists are funded either by grants, palliative care/hospice programs, or patient billing. References Clair AA. Therapeutic uses of music with older adults. Baltimore, MD: Health Professions Press; 1996: pp186-191. Porchet-Munro S. Music therapy. In: Doyle D, Hanks GWC, MacDonald N, eds. Oxford Textbook of Palliative Medicine. New York, NY: Oxford University Press; 1998; pp855- 860. Hilliard RE. Music therapy in pediatric palliative care: complementing the interdisciplinary approach. J Pall Care. 2003; 19(2):127-32. Hilliard RE. The effects of music therapy on the quality and length of life of people diagnosed with terminal cancer. J Music Ther. 2003; 40(2):113-137. Information about Music Therapy certification can be found at the website of the American Music Therapy Association. Available at: http://www.musictherapy.org/about.html . ACGME Competencies: Interpersonal and Communication Skills, Patient Care Keyword(s): Psychosocial and Spiritual Experience: Patients, Families, and Clinicians 
#109 Death Rattle and Oral Secretions, 2nd ed Author(s): Katherine Bickel and Robert Arnold MD Background As the level of consciousness decreases in the dying process, patients lose their ability to swallow and clear oral secretions. As air moves over the secretions, which have pooled in the oropharynx and bronchi, the resulting turbulence produces noisy ventilation with each breath, described as ‘gurgling ‘or ‘rattling noises.’ While there is no evidence that patients find this ‘death rattle’ disturbing, the noises may be disturbing to the patient’s visitors and caregivers who may fear that the patient is choking to death. However, similar sounds may occur in patients who are not imminently dying, such as in those with brain injuries or in patients with various disorders leading to increased production or decreased clearance of secretions. Two sub-types of the death rattle have been proposed, although the significance regarding treatment has not been established: Type 1 = predominantly salivary secretions and Type 2 = predominantly bronchial secretions. Death rattle is a good predictor of near death; one study indicated the median time from onset of death rattle to death was 16 hours. Non-Pharmacological Treatments Position the patient on their side or in a semi-prone position to facilitate postural drainage A minute or two of Trendelenburg positioning can be used to move fluids up into the oropharynx for easier removal; aspiration risk is increased, however. Gentle oropharyngeal suctioning is used although this can be ineffective when fluids are beyond the reach of the catheter. Frequent suctioning is disturbing to both the patient and the visitors. Reduction of fluid intake. Pharmacological Treatments While there are no evidence-based guidelines, the standard of care is to use muscarinic receptor blockers (anti-cholinergic drugs). These include scopolamine, hyoscyamine, glycopyrrolate, and atropine. All of these agents can cause varying degrees of blurred vision, sedation, confusion, delirium, restlessness, hallucinations, palpitations, constipation, and urinary retention. The primary difference in these drugs is whether they are tertiary amines which cross the blood-brain barrier (scopolamine, atropine, hyoscyamine) or quaternary amines, which do not (glycopyrrolate). Drugs which cross the blood-brain barrier are apt to cause CNS toxicity (sedation, delirium). Drug Trade Name Route Starting Dose Onset scopolamine (hyoscine) hydrobromide Transderm Scop Patch One 1.5mg atch ~12 h (24 h to steady state) hyoscyamine Levsin PO,SL 0.125mg 30min glycopyrrolate Robinul PO 0.2mg 30min glycopyrrolate Robinul SubQ, IV 0.1mg 1min atropine sulfate Atropine SubQ, IV 0.1mg 1min atropine sulfate multiple Sublingual 1gtt (1% opth. soln) 30min Pharmacological pearls Glycopyrrolate has five times the anti-secretory potency compared to atropine but is poorly and erratically absorbed. The clinical significance of this is unclear. The scopolamine patch releases ~1 mg over 72 hours. It takes 24 hours to reach steady state and for acute symptoms other drugs should be used. The patch should be placed on hairless skin just behind the ear, is changed every 72 hours, and more than one patch can be used at a time. Hyoscyamine is available in short-acting, sustained-released, orally dispersible tablet, and oral solution forumations. References Back IN, Jenkins K, Blower A, Beckhelling J. A study comparing hyoscine hydrobromide and glycopyrrolate in the treatment of death rattle. Palliat Med .2001; 15:329-336. Ohio Hospice & Palliative Care Organization. Palliative Care Pocket Consultant. Dubuqe, IA: Kendall Hunt Publishing; 2001. Twycross R, Wilcock A, eds. Hospice and Palliative Care Formulary USA. Nottingham, UK: Palliativedrugs.com Ltd; 2006. Wilders H, Menten J. Death rattle: prevalence, prevention and treatment. J Pain Symptom Manage. 2002; 23:310-317. Wee B, Hillier R. Interventions for noisy breathing in patients near to death. Cochrane Database of Systematic Reviews 2008, Issue 1. Art. No.: CD005177. DOI: 10.1002/14651858.CD005177.pub2. ACGME Competencies: Medical Knowledge, Patient Care Keyword(s): Non-Pain Symptoms and Syndromes 
#110 Urine Drug Testing for Opioids and Marijuana Author(s): Marissa Mapa and Robert Arnold Background Urine drug testing (UDT) is widely used for testing for opioids and illicit drugs. There are two types of UDT: a screening test and a confirmatory test. The screening test uses an immunoassay to look for the parent drug and/or metabolite. Most UDTs screen for marijuana, cocaine, opiates, PCP, and amphetamines; some also test for benzodiazepines and methadone. The confirmatory urine drug test is done by gas chromatography/mass spectrometry (GC/MS) or high-performance liquid chromatography (HPLC); this test is highly specific and is typically used when testing for the presence of a specific drug is needed. UDT Interpretation A UDT cannot tell the amount of drug ingested/used or the time of use or the source of drug (intravenous vs. oral vs. inhaled). Detection time of a substance in urine is typically 1-3 days. The rate of excretion varies depending on differences in metabolism/ urinary function. Thus, obtaining history as to when a suspected drug was last used needs to be correlated to the timing of the test. Lipid-soluble drugs (e.g. marijuana) may remain in body fat and be detectable for a week or more. Typically the screening immunoassay UDT detects the amount of drug present in urine above a predetermined “cut-off” concentration. Thus, a substance may be present, but if the concentration of that drug is below the cut-off, the result will be negative. If you suspect drug use or desire the confirmation of this substance, ask the urine to be tested with a “no cut-off” or “no threshold testing” or ask for a confirmatory test with GC/MS or HPLC. If specimen tampering is suspected, ensure the urine is compatible with human physiology. The urine temperature should be 90-100 0 F; pH between 4.5 – 8.0; and a spot check of urinary creatinine should be greater than 20 mg/dL. A creatinine less than 20 mg/dL is considered dilute; less than 5 mg/dL is not consistent with human urine and the sample should be discarded. The screening immunoassay test has limited specificity for opiates. The test cannot differentiate morphine from codeine (natural occurring opiates) and will not reliably detect synthetic or semi-synthetic opioids. A confirmatory test is required to test for all opioids. Knowledge of opiates’ metabolism is needed for UDT interpretation. For example, codeine and heroin are both metabolized to morphine, through different pathways and different intermediary metabolites. A prescription for codeine may yield an appropriate positive result for codeine and morphine in the urine. However, if codeine is prescribed and only morphine is found in drug testing, the most consistent interpretation is the unknown use of morphine or heroin. Prescribed morphine will result in only morphine in a sample and not codeine. The presence of marijuana is detected by the presence of tetrahydrocannabinol (THC), its active ingredient. The screening immunoassay UDT is unable to distinguish between smoked marijuana and the synthetic preparation dronabinol (Marinol). False positive immunoassays are the result of cross reactivity. Quinolones, specifically levofloxacin and ofloxacin, may give a positive result for opiates. The cost of a UDT differs from lab to lab and especially in the number of substances tested. The screening test costs between $69 to $148; the confirmatory test ranges from $92 to $165. References Gourlay D, Heit H, Caplan Y. Urine Drug Testing in Primary Care: Dispelling the Myths and Designing Strategies. Monograph PharmaCom Group, Inc; 2002. Heit HA, Gourlay DL. Urine drug testing in pain medicine. J Pain Symptom Manage. 2004; 27:260-7. ACGME Competencies: Medical Knowledge, Patient Care, Systems-Based Practice Keyword(s): Pain – Opioids 
#111 Cardiac Pacemakers at End-of-Life Author(s): Harrington MD, Luebke DL, Lewis WR, Aulisio MP, Johnson NJ Introduction This Fast Fact discusses management of cardiac pacemakers at life’s end. Fast Fact #112 discusses implantable cardioverter-defibrillators. Background Worldwide there are about 3 million people with pacemakers. Each year 600,000 new pacemakers are implanted, with the majority of these devices in patients over the age of 60. The primary function of pacemakers is to treat bradyarrhythmias (e.g. heart block). More recently, patients with heart failure, subvalvular stenosis and treatment resistant atrial fibrillation may qualify for pacemakers. Additionally, patients with congestive heart failure may receive biventricular pacemakers to improve symptoms. Pacemaker Function at Time of Death Patients and their families often make assumptions that pacemakers prolong the dying process and thus prolong suffering. However, a pacemaker is not a resuscitative device. In general, pacemakers do not keep dying patients alive, as terminal events are often due to sepsis, hemorrhage, pulmonary emboli, or arrhythmias from metabolic abnormalities associated with end-stage cancer, liver, or renal failure. At the time of death, the myocardium is usually too sick to respond to the pacemaker generated signals. When is Pacemaker Deactivation indicated? In patients with irreversible cognitive failure, where continued pacemaker activity is not meeting the goals of care, it may be appropriate to discuss the option of deactivation. In most other situations, deactivation is not indicated since the result is likely to be a symptomatic bradycardia, producing signs and symptoms of worsening heart failure (fatigue, dizziness, dyspnea). In contrast to popular belief, it is rare that disabling the pacemaker will result in a swift and painless death as few patients are 100% pacemaker dependant, particularly during the period of imminent death ( Fast Fact#3 ), where tachycardia is the most common rhythm. When questions arise concerning dependency on the pacemaker, consult the cardiology/pacemaker service. Ethical/Legal issues A patient’s/surrogate’s right to request withdrawal of life sustaining medical interventions, including pacemakers, is both legal and ethical. Withdrawal of a life sustaining medical intervention with the informed consent of a patient or legal surrogate is not physician-assisted suicide or euthanasia. Summary Initiate a discussion about pacemaker deactivation only if there is potential for patient benefit; consider the potential negative effects of deactivation before disabling the pacemaker. References Braun TC, Hagen NA, Hatfield RE, Wyse DG. Cardiac pacemakers and implantable defibrillators in terminal care. J Pain Symptom Manage. 1999; 18:126-131. Kolarik RC, Arnold RM, Fischer GS, Tulsky, JA. Objectives for advance care planning. J Palliative Med. 2002; 5(5):697-704. Mueller PS, Hook CC, Hayes, DL. Ethical analysis of withdrawal of pacemaker or implantable cardioverter-defibrillator support at the end of life. Mayo Clin Proc. 2003; 78:959-963. Wood MA, Ellenbogen KA. Cardiac pacemakers from the patient’s perspective. Circulation. 2002; 105:1022-1024. ACGME Competencies: Medical Knowledge, Patient Care Keyword(s): Ethics, Law, Policy Health Systems 
#112 Implantable Cardioverter-Defibrillators at End-of-Life Author(s): Harrington MD, Luebke DL, Lewis WR, Aulisio MP, Johnson NJ Background Recent clinical trials and advances in device technology have expanded the indications for implantation of cardiac devices. In 2002 alone, 96,000 implantable cardioverter-defibrillators (ICDs) were implanted in North America. It is estimated that over 3 million patients in North America could now be eligible for an ICD, with over 400,000 additional patients meeting the criteria every year. However, near the end of life, decisions as to how best to use these devices can be the source of much anguish for patients, families and palliative care/hospice staff. Current Devices ICDs are somewhat larger than pacemakers and are usually implanted in the upper chest under the clavicle. They monitor cardiac rhythm and can either cardiovert or defibrillate (electrically ‘shock’ a heart) when certain rapid abnormal cardiac rhythms are identified. These shocks can be painful and are inconsistent with comfort care in a dying patient. ICDs can also deliver pacing therapy. Pacing increases heart rate when slow heart rhythms are detected and can promote comfort as slow heart rhythms can cause heart failure symptoms. The shocking and pacing functions of an ICD can be independently turned off and a decision to discontinue a device’s ICD function should be considered separately from a decision to discontinue its pacing functions (see Fast Fact #111 about discontinuation of pacemakers). Indications for deactivation of ICD therapy Continued use of an ICD is inconsistent with patient goals. Withdrawal of anti-arrhythmic medications: if anti-arrhythmic medications are withdrawn consider turning off the ICD to avoid frequent shocks. Imminent death. The patient has a DNR order. The functioning of an ICD is generally inconsistent with a ‘Do-Not-Resuscitate’ order since ICDs attempt to resuscitate the patient by shocking their hearts back into a life-sustaining rhythm. Discussing deactivation of the ICD Consult the clinician who manages the ICD (usually a cardiologist or associated clinician); that individual is often the person to assume responsibility for deactivation. Patients are usually followed in a device clinic and probably have an established relationship with the physician and staff. The involvement of these professionals canprovide a sense of comfort and closure for the patient and family. Note: The device manufacturers will not send representatives to patient’s homes for deactivation. Discuss expectations of “turning off” the ICD. The following should be made clear: Turning off the ICD means that the device will no long provide life-saving therapy in the event of a ventricular tachyarrhythmia. Turning off the ICD will not cause death. Turning off the ICD will not be painful, nor will its failure to function cause pain. Establish a plan of care that will ensure availability for addressing new questions or concerns that might arise (patient/family should not feel abandoned once the device is turned off). If there are conflicts among providers or family members, consultation with a palliative care expert or ethics team can be helpful. Ethical/Legal issues A patient’s right to request withdrawal of life sustaining medical interventions, including ICDs, is both legal and ethical. Withdrawal of a life sustaining medical intervention with the informed consent of a patient or legal surrogate is not physician-assisted suicide or euthanasia. References Groh WJ, Foreman LD, Zipes DP. Advances in the treatment of arrhythmias: Impantable cardioverter-defibrillators. Am Fam Phys. 1998; 57(2):297-307, 310-12. Kolarik RC, Arnold RM, Fischer GS, Tulsky JA. Objectives for advance care planning. J of Palliative Med. 2002; 5(5):697-704. Moss AJ, Zareba W, Hall WJ, et al. Prophylactic implantation of a defibrillator in patients with myocardial infaction and reduced ejection fraction. NEJM. 2002; 346(12):877-883. Mueller PS. Ethical analysis of withdrawal of pacemaker or implantable cardioverter-defibrillator support at the end of life. Mayo Clinic Proceedings. 2003; 78(8):959-963. ACGME Competencies: Medical Knowledge, Patient Care Keyword(s): Ethics, Law, Policy Health Systems 
#113 Bisphosponates for Bone Pain Author(s): Elizabeth Weinstein and Robert Arnold MD Background Bisphosphonates are used for the treatment or prophylaxis of cancer-related bone complications, including pain. The mechanism of action is thought to be related to inhibition of bone resorption. All bisphosphonates inhibit osteoclast activity and some also inhibit the maturation of mononuclear precursors into active osteoclasts. In the United States, two preparations are used: zoledronic acid and pamidronate. Analgesic Therapy Breast cancer and multiple myeloma have been found to be the most responsive tumors to bisphosphonates. Pain relief has been shown to a lesser degree in lung, GI and prostate carcinomas. Standard starting doses include: zoledronic acid 4 mg IV over 15 minutes and pamidronate 90mg IV administered over 2 hours. 50-70% of patients achieve a 30% reduction in pain within a week. The average duration of pain relief is 12 weeks after a single 90 mg infusion of pamidronate. If analgesia is not achieved within a week, the patient can be retreated. Analgesic effect is related both to the dose per week and the total dose per infusion for pamidronate. Typically patients are treated every 3-4 weeks to achieve maximal effect. If the pain is well controlled the dosing interval can be extended to a longer period without change in effect. Prophylaxis In patients with breast cancer or multiple myeloma, and asymptomatic bone metastases, monthly bisphosphonates decrease skeletal-related events (SRE) (pathologic fractures, spinal cord compression, surgery to bone, or radiation therapy to bone) by 30%. The dosages of pamidronate and zoledronic acid are the same as used in analgesic therapy. There is no evidence that these medications prevent SRE in patients without known bone involvement. Toxicity Pamidronate and zoledronic acid have the same safety profiles. Both cause an injection site reaction and a flu-like syndrome that responds well to acetaminophen. Less common side effects include hypocalcemia and scleritis. Renal dysfunction is a side effect of long-term, high dose or short interval/frequency use of bisphosphonates; this is typically reversible with discontinuation of the drug. Bisphosphonates are contraindicated in renal failure and with patients who experience an increase in creatinine (>0.5 mg/dl over baseline or >1.0 in patients with pre-existing renal insufficiency). In moderate renal dysfunction (Cr > 3.0 mg/dl) the dose of both agents should either be reduced and/or the infusion time increased. Fast Fact #196 discusses bisphosphonate induced osteonecrosis of the jaw. Cost The average wholesale price for zoledronic acid 4mg is $856; the AWP of pamidronate 90 mg is $88. In considering the cost difference between these two drugs it is important to acknowledge the added costs to patients, physicians and medical facilities for the infusion time of pamidronate (average appointment time 2h 52 min vs. 1h 6min for zoledronic acid). References Hillner B, Ingle J, Chlebowski RT, et al. ASCO 2003 update on the role of bisphosphonates and bone health issues in women with breast cancer. J Clin Oncol. 2003; 21(21):4042-4057. Pereira J. Management of Bone Pain. In: Portenoy RK, Bruera E, eds. Topics in Palliative Care, Volume 3. New York, NY: Oxford University Press: 1998. Body JJ, Mancini I. Bisphosphonates for cancer patients: why, how and when? Support Care Cancer. 2002; 10(5):399-407. Body JJ. Dosing regimens and main adverse events of bisphosphonates. Semin Oncol. 2001; 28(4, Suppl 11):49-53. Strang P. Analgesic effect of bisphosphonates on bone pain in breast cancer patients: a review article. Acta Oncol. 1996; 35(Suppl 5):50-54. Berenson JR, Rosen LS Howell A, et al: Zoledronic acid reduces skeletal-related events in patients with osteolytic metastases. Cancer. 2001; 91:1191-1200. DesHarnais CL, Bajwa K, Markle JP, et al. A microcosting analysis of zoledronic acid and pamidronate therapy in patients with metastatic bone disease. Support Cancer Care. 2001; 9:545-551. ACGME Competencies: Medical Knowledge, Patient Care Keyword(s): Pain – Non-Opioids 
#114 Myoclonus Author(s): Nicholas DeMonaco and Robert Arnold MD Background Myoclonus is a movement disorder described as focal or generalized, sudden, brief, shock-like, involuntary movements caused by muscle contractions. This Fast Fact discusses its causes, evaluation, and therapy. Characteristics and Differential Diagnosis Hiccups are an example of normal, physiological myoclonus, while asterixis is an example of the myoclonus seen with generalized encephalopathy. In nocturnal myoclonus or periodic leg movement disorder, there is activity in the flexor muscles of the legs and feet during light sleep. It can be seen in the setting of chronic nervous system diseases or in elderly patients with no other abnormalities. The brief, shock-like movements of myoclonus may be difficult to distinguish from dystonia, which classically has repetitive, patterned, sustained movements. An acute dystonic reaction can occur with use of drugs which block dopamine receptors, including certain antipsychotics (haloperidol), antiemetics (metoclopramide), and calcium-channel blockers Causes The etiologies of myoclonus are numerous. Near the end of life, metabolic abnormalities and medication-induced myoclonus predominate. Metabolic causes include liver failure, renal failure, hyponatremia, and hypoglycemia. The medications and toxins associated with myoclonus include opioids, anticonvulsants (gabapentin, phenytoin, valproate, lamotrigine, and phenobarbitol), tricyclic antidepressants and selective serotonin reuptake inhibitors, contrast dye, anesthetics, antibiotics (penicillins, cephalosporins, imipenem, and quinolones), cannabinoids and the chemotherapeutic agent ifosfamide Opioid-induced myoclonus occurs commonly and is often misdiagnosed (See Fast Facts #57 , 58 ). When myoclonus occurs due to toxins or medications, the jerks are usually generalized and may be provoked by a stimulus or voluntary movement. Other causes of myoclonus include focal CNS damage from a tumor or stroke, encephalopathies (viral, metabolic or degenerative), or seizure disorders. Treatment Myoclonus can disrupt sleep, make coordinated movements difficult, and be bothersome to patients or families. Treatment consists of correction of the underlying cause and symptomatic treatment of the myoclonus. If the offending agent is a non-essential medication, it should be discontinued. In the case of opioid-induced myoclonus, rotation to a different opioid may help. Benzodiazepines are the primary symptomatic treatment. While any benzodiazepine will work, a continuous infusion of midazolam has been suggested given the drug’s compatibility with morphine and short half-life, allowing rapid dose titration. Sedation is likely. If sedation is to be avoided, the muscle relaxant dantrolene in doses of 50-100 mg per day has also been reported as effective. References Fahn S. Overview, history, and classification of myoclonus. Adv Neurol. 2002; 89:13-17. Gordon MF. Toxin and drug-induced myoclonus. Adv Neurol. 2002; 89:49-76. Jankovic J. Hyperkinetic movement disorders. In: Basow DS. UpToDate. Waltham, MA: UpToDate; 2003. Mercadante S. Pathophysiology and treatment of opioid-related myoclonus in cancer patients. Pain. 1998; 74:5-9. Rivest J. Myoclonus (Rev). Can J Neurol Sci. 2003; 30(Suppl 1):S53-58. ACGME Competencies: Medical Knowledge, Patient Care Keyword(s): Non-Pain Symptoms and Syndromes 
#115 Declaring Brain Death: The Neurologic Criteria Author(s): Amal Puswella, Mike DeVita, Robert M Arnold MD Background This Fast Fact reviews the details of declaring death based on neurological criteria. In 1979, the Model Brain Death Act was created which stated that a dead individual has either 1) irreversible cessation of circulatory and respiratory function or 2) irreversible cessation of all functions of the entire brain, including the brainstem. Determining death by neurologic criteria involves two steps: Step 1: Rule out reversible causes of unconsciousness: sedative medication, neuromuscular blocking agents or hypothermia. Step 2: Rule out the presence of cortical activity and brainstem reflexes using clinical exams/tests. The exact tests done may vary by institution and one should check with their own institution’s policies. For a person to be dead, however, all tests must show lack of brain function. Typically, all of the following must be met to ensure the diagnosis: No spontaneous movement and no movement in response to painful stimuli (movement due to spinal reflexes are acceptable). No seizures or decerebrate, decorticate, or dyskinetic movements or posturing. Absent cranial nerve reflexes including pupillary response to light, corneal reflexes, caloric response, and gagging and cough with suctioning. Caloric testing is done by first making sure the auditory canal is clear and the tympanic membranes are intact. The head is elevated to 300 above horizontal and 50 ml of ice water is slowly infused into the canals. The normal response would be nystagmus; in brain death, there is no response. Both ears must be tested with a five minute interval in between. Note: At some institutions other clinical tests are done before a formal apnea test (see below). For example, some require documentation of no vagal nerve activity – an atropine test is used. The patient is given 2 mg IV atropine. In the dead patient, the parasympathetic outflow is non-functioning and the heart rate will not change ( <10 beats/minute). Absence of central respiratory drive is assessed using the apnea test to see if a rise of CO2 provides a stimulus to breathe. The patient is ventilated with 100% oxygen for 10-20 minutes and a baseline blood gas is obtained. The ventilator is then removed while 100% oxygen is delivered; O2 saturation is continuously assessed. A follow-up ABG is done after 5-10 minutes. If the PaCO2 rises past 60mm Hg and no breathing efforts are observed, the respiratory center is not functioning. The test should be aborted if the patient develops hypoxemia (also indicates no respiratory drive) or arrhythmias. Adjunctive or confirmatory tests are needed in complex clinical situations such as uremia or hepatic encephalopathy, when apnea testing cannot be performed, or when the primary brain insult is infratentorial. Electroencephalogram: must be isoelectric. Transcranial Doppler: intracranial arteries demonstrate either absence of diastolic flow, or small systolic peaks. Somatosensory Evoked Potentials: bilateral median nerve stimulation demonstrates an absence of the N20-P22 response. Intracranial Pressure: sustained, elevated ICP within 10 mmHg of mean arterial pressure. Tests of cerebral blood flow: if there is no cerebral blood flow then there is no brain function and death may be determined based on this test alone. Specific tests include cranial radionuclide angiography and contrast angiography. References Plum F, Posner J. The Diagnosis of Stupor and Coma. 3rd Edition. New York, NY: Oxford University Press; 1982: pp57-61, 313-320. Van Norman G. A matter of life and death: what every anesthesiologist should know about the medical, legal, and ethical aspects of declaring brain death. Anesthesiology. 1999; 91(1):275-287. Certification of Death in Adults Policy: 5108. University of Pittsburgh Medical Center, Pittsburgh, PA; 2000. ACGME Competencies: Medical Knowledge, Patient Care, Systems-Based Practice Keyword(s): Ethics, Law, Policy Health Systems 
#116 Radiopharmaceuticals for Painful Osseous Metastases Author(s): Gary M Reisfield MD and George R Wilson MD Introduction This Fast Fact reviews bone-seeking radiopharmaceuticals (radionuclides), which occupy a valuable niche in the palliation of painful bone metastases (see Fast Facts #66 and 67 for a general discussion of palliative radiation). Isotopes and Physiology The three isotopes available in this country – 89 Sr (strontium-89), 153 Sm (samarium-153), and 32 P (phosphorus-32) – work by binding with high affinity to hydroxyapatite in regions of rapid bone turnover near osteoblastic metastases, delivering therapeutic doses of localized beta radiation, with a tissue penetration measured in millimeters. The precise mechanism of analgesia is unknown but is probably not dependent solely on cell kill. Rather, analgesia may also be a function of inhibition of lymphocyte-associated cytokines or alterations in osteoclast and/or osteoblast activity. Benefits Analgesia may begin within 3-7 days, but more typically begins within one to two weeks after administration. Analgesia will last from two to six months; treatment may be repeated. Symptom improvement is noted in 60-80% of patients, with complete analgesia in 20-30% of responders. Radiopharmaceuticals may delay onset of pain in pre-existing, clinically silent metastases. Procedure The radiopharmaceutical is delivered in the outpatient setting by a single IV injection or orally ( 32 P only). Administration requires no special monitoring. Patient selection Patients with multiple painful bone metastases, demonstrated by bone scan and/or plain X-ray, corresponding to site(s) of pain and an expected survival of >12 weeks are appropriate for radiopharmaceutical therapy. Evidence supporting efficacy in prostate and breast cancer is substantial; data for other tumor types are limited. Contraindications Preexisting myelosuppression (e.g. WBC <3.0K and Platelets <60-100K). Oncological urgencies/emergencies in which radiopharmaceuticals will be of no benefit (e.g. actual or impending spinal cord compression or pathologic fracture). Renal insufficiency (relative contraindication). Evidence of disseminated intravascular coagulation (relative contraindication). Pregnancy Adverse effects Marrow suppression: Reversible, moderate neutropenia and thrombocytopenia – manifested by approximately 30-70% drop in leukocyte and platelet counts – is a predictable side effect. Depending on the specific agent this begins two to four weeks following administration, with a nadir between weeks four to six. Bone marrow recovery occurs by weeks eight to twelve. Pain flare: Increasing pain occurs in 10-20% of patients, usually within the first week of administration. It is transient and may be predictive of a good therapeutic response. Approximate retail costs (Note: dosing is calculated based on patient weight.) Strontium-89 chloride injection: $3,097 / 5 mCi. Samarium-153 lexidronam injection $2,770 / 150 mCi. Sodium phosphate P-32 solution: $500 / 5 mCi. Comparative Data There is little data comparing the three agents. However, the International Atomic Energy Agency sponsored a randomized, single-blind study comparing a single doses of oral 32P (12 mCi) and intravenous 89 Sr (4 mCi). Patients were well-matched in terms of tumor type, degree of osseous involvement, and pretreatment pain scores. Partial (>50%) and complete (100%) analgesia responses were as follows: 89 Sr: 7/15 and 8/15 patients, respectively; 32 P: 7/16 and 7/16 patients, respectively. There were no significant differences in onset/duration/degree of analgesia or functional improvement. Hematologic toxicity was comparable save except that the 32 P group had more thrombocytopenia. References Hellman RS, Krasnow AZ. Radionuclide therapy for palliative of pain due to osteoblastic metastases. J Pall Med. 1998; 1:277-283. Silberstein EB. Painful osteoblastic metastases: the role of nuclear medicine. Oncology. 2001; 15(2):157-163. Lewington VJ. A practical guide to targeted therapy for bone pain palliation. Nucl Med Commun. 2002; 23(9):833-836. Mertens WC, Filipczak LA, Ben-Josef E, Davis LP, Porter AT. Systemic bone-seeking radionuclides for palliation of painful osseous metastases: current concepts. CA Cancer J Clin.1998; 48(6):361-374. Nair N. Relative efficacy of 32P and 89Sr in palliation in skeletal metastases. J Nucl Med. 1999; 40(2):256-261. ACGME Competencies: Medical Knowledge, Patient Care Keyword(s): Pain – Non-Opioids 
#117 Pediatric Pain Assessment Scales Author(s): Gena Walker and Robert Arnold MD Background Neonates and infants do experience pain. In fact, research has shown that neonates may experience as much pain as older children and long-term consequences from exposure to repeated painful stimuli. Untreated pain leads to increased sensitivity to subsequent stimuli. Assessing pain in neonates and young children requires use of age appropriate scales. There is no empirical evidence demonstrating the superiority of one assessment tool, but research suggests that the same scale(s) should be used within an institution. Behavioral Observational Scales The primary method of pain assessment for infants, children less than 3 yrs old, and developmentally disabled patients. Validated tools include: CRIES: Assesses Crying, Oxygen requirement, Increased vital signs, facial Expression, Sleep. An observer provides a score of 0-2 for each parameter based on changes from baseline. For example, a grimace, the facial expression most often associated with pain, gains a score of 1 but if associated with a grunt will be scored a 2. The scale is useful for neonatal postoperative pain. NIPS: Neonatal/Infants Pain Scale has been used mostly in infants less than 1 yr of age. Facial expression, cry, breathing pattern, arms, legs, and state of arousal are observed for 1 minute intervals before, during, and after a procedure and a numeric score is assigned to each. A score >3 indicates pain. An example is available at: http://www.anes.ucla.edu/pain/assessment_tool-nips.htm . FLACC: Face, Legs, Activity, Crying, Consolability scale has been validated from 2 mo to 7 years. FLACC uses 0-10 scoring. An example is available at: http://www.anes.ucla.edu/pain/assessment_tool-flacc.htm. CHEOPS: Children’s Hospital of Eastern Ontario Scale. Intended for children 1-7 yrs old. Assesses cry, facial expression, verbalization, torso movement, if child touches affected site, and position of legs. A score >/= 4 signifies pain. An example is available at: http://www.anes.ucla.edu/pain/assessment_tool-cheops.htm . Self report Children 3 years of age and older can rank their pain using one of several validated scales including: Wong-Baker Faces scale: 6 cartoon faces showing increasing degrees of distress. Face 0 signifies “no hurt” and face 5 the “worst hurt you can imagine.” The child chooses the face that best describes pain at the time of assessment. An example is available at: http://www1.us.elsevierhealth.com/FACES/. Bieri-Modified: 6 cartoon faces starting from a neutral state and progressing to tears/crying. Scored 0-10 by the child. Used for children >3 years. Visual analogue scale: Uses a 10 cm line with one end marked as no pain and the opposite end marked as the worst pain. The child is asked to make a mark on that line that is then measured in cm from the no pain end. References Hockenberry M, Wilson D, et al. Wong’s Nursing Care of Infants and Children. 7th Edition. St Louis, MO: Mosby; 2003: pp1052-1053. Berde CB, Sethna NF. Analgesics for the treatment of pain in children. N Engl J Med. 2002; 347:1094-1101. Zempsky WT, Schechter, NL. What’s new in the management of pain in children. Pediatrics in Review. 2003; 24:337-347. Merkel SI, Voepel-Lewis T, Shayevitz JR, Malviya S. The FLACC: a behavioral scale for scoring postoperative pain in young children. Pediatr Nurs. 1997; 3(3):293-7. Hicks CL, von Baeyer CL, Spafford PA, et al. The Faces Pain Scale-Revised: toward a common metric in pediatric pain measurement. Pain. 2001; 93(2):173-83. Cancer Pain Management in Children (web-site). Texas Cancer Council. Available at: http://www.childcancerpain.org . ACGME Competencies: Medical Knowledge, Patient Care Keyword(s): Pain – Evaluation 
#118 Near Death Awareness Author(s): Lucille Marchand MD, BSN Background Near death awareness (NDA) is a term to describe a dying person’s experiences of the dying process. Information comes from broadly reported anecdotes. Patients appear to describe what dying is like and what they need for a peaceful death. The language patients use to communicate NDA may be symbolic. If caretakers are not aware that NDA can occur, patients may be treated condescendingly, ignored, or inappropriately medicated for delirium. Family, friends, and health professionals may respond with annoyance, frustration or fear. This, in turn, may cause isolation, suffering, and impair the dying person’s ability to communicate meaningful experiences at the end of life. NDA vs. Delirium The distinction between NDA and delirium can be difficult; NDA communications, such as reports of patients seeing and speaking to dead relatives, can be misinterpreted as delirium. Delirium presents with deficits in orientation, attention, and short-term memory and should be assessed carefully and treated appropriately. Near Death Phenomena The recognition of NDA requires attentive listening. Health professionals, family, friends and caregivers can help decipher NDA messages. Two broad categories of messages have been described. Attempts to describe what dying is like: Communicating with or experiencing the presence of someone who is not alive. Preparing for travel or a change. Describing a place they can see in another realm. Knowing when death will occur. Requests for something to ensure a peaceful death: Achieve closure in a personal or spiritual relationship, or in an ethical matter.. Remove a barrier to achieving closure. Prepare for death via specific items or rituals. Pearls for Listening for NDA Phenomena Evaluate for causes of delirium and treat when appropriate. Be careful to evaluate for agitation arising from a message not being understood or addressed. Gently ask patient about messages you do not understand. Accept and validate what the patient is telling you; do not challenge or argue. Be honest when you do not understand, but let patient know you will keep trying. If you do not know what to say, say nothing – but be present. Health Professional Responses to NDA Phenomena Help the patient find closure, relieve suffering and anxiety, and help the patient achieve a peaceful, fulfilling death. Help families, friends and health professionals gain comfort and important knowledge about dying. Lessen our own fears about dying. Further Resources See the following references for clinical examples. Examples in the Callahan and Kelley text provide guidance for caretakers on how to help patients who are experiencing NDA. References Callahan M, Kelley P. Final Gifts: Understanding the Special Awareness, Needs, and Communications of the Dying. New York, NY: Bantam Books; 1992. Moody R. Life after Life. New York, NY: Bantam Books; 1975. Greenberg D. Preventing Delirium at end of life: lessons from recent research. Primary care companion. J Clin Psychiatry. 2003; 5(2):62-67. ACGME Competencies: Medical Knowledge, Patient Care Keyword(s): Non-Pain Symptoms and Syndromes, Psychosocial and Spiritual Experience: Patients, Families, and Clinicians 
#119 Invasive Treatment Options for Malignant Bowel Obstruction Author(s): Robert S Krouse MD Background Malignant bowel obstruction (MBO) is a common problem in patients with ovarian and colorectal cancers. MBO also occurs with other abdominal (e.g. gastric and pancreatic) and non-abdominal malignancies. MBO may be related to cancer (intraluminal or extraluminal tumor growth), its treatment (e.g. radiation enteritis), or benign etiologies (e.g. adhesions or internal hernias). Invasive treatment options should be considered for all patients except those who are actively dying ( see Fast Fact #3 ). In cases where surgical management is not feasible, medical management can be very effective at relieving symptoms ( see Fast Fact #45 ). Goals of Treatment The goals of treatment include relieving nausea and vomiting, allowing oral intake, alleviating pain, and permitting the patient to return to their chosen care setting. Although it is recognized that improvement in quality of life after surgery is variable (42-85%), there is no consistent parameter used to determine this clinical outcome. Operations may offer an advantage of an increased survival. Surgical Approaches The optimal procedure is that which offers the quickest, safest, and most efficacious ability to alleviate the obstruction and improve symptoms. Options include bowel resection (which may lead to the best overall outcome), bypass, or a gastrostomy. An intestinal stoma may be necessary after resection or to adequately bypass the blockage. Laparoscopic procedures may be attempted, although this approach may be difficult due to adhesions, carcinomatosis, or bowel dilatation. Cytoreductive procedures (resection of intraperitoneal tumor) frequently carry a high morbidity and usually are only considered with very low grade tumors, such as psuedomyxoma peritonii. Many patients are deemed inoperable (6.2-50%), with the most frequent reasons being extensive tumor spread, multiple partial obstructions, and inability to correct obstructions surgically. Surgical risks must be carefully considered prior to an operation, as morbidity (42%) and mortality (5-32%) are common, and the re-obstruction rate is high (10-50%). Poor prognostic indicators for surgical intervention include ascites, carcinomatosis, palpable intra-abdominal masses, multiple bowel obstructions, prior obstructions and very advanced disease with poor performance status. Endoscopic Approaches Endoscopic procedures are suited for patients who are poor operative candidates or who decline an open operative intervention. The major approaches include stenting and percutaneous endoscopic gastrostomy (PEG) tube placement. Stenting may include procedures to initially canalize the lumen (e.g. laser or balloon dilatation). Endoluminal wall stents have a high success rate for relief of symptoms (64-100%) in complete and incomplete colorectal obstructions, and in over 70% of upper intestinal malignant obstructions including gastric outlet, duodenal and jejunal obstructions. While risks include perforation (0-15%), stent migration (0-40%), or re-occlusion (0-33%), stents can frequently lead to adequate palliation for long periods of time. Stent occlusion by tumor in-growth is usually amenable to another endoscopic intervention. PEG tubes are generally well tolerated “venting” procedures that can alleviate symptoms of intractable vomiting and nausea for upper GI obstructions. In combination with other medical techniques, both open and percutaneous gastrostomy offer the possibility of intermittent oral intake. Complications are rare, even when puncturing other organs. The presence of significant ascites is a relative contraindication. References Feuer DJ, Broadley, KE, Shepherd JH, Barton DP. Systematic review of surgery in malignant bowel obstruction in advanced gynecological and gastrointestinal cancer. Gynecol Oncol. 1999; 75:313-322. Harris GJC, Senagore AJ, Lavery IC, Fazio VW. The management of neoplastic colorectal obstruction with colonic endoluminal stenting devices. Am J Surg. 2001; 181:499-506. Soetikno RM, Carr-Locke DL. Expandable metal stents for gastric outlet, duodenal, and small intestinal obstruction. Gastrointestinal Endoscopy Clinics of North America. 1999; 9:447-458. Campagnutta E, Cannizzaro R. Percutaneous endoscopic gastrostomy (PEG) in palliative treatment of non-operable intestinal obstruction due to gynecologic cancer: a review. Eur J Gynaecol Oncol. 2000; 21:397-402. ACGME Competencies: Medical Knowledge, Patient Care Keyword(s): Non-Pain Symptoms and Syndromes 
#120 Physicians and Prayer Requests Author(s): Kate Kwiatkowski, Robert Arnold MD, David Barnard PhD Background Physicians are commonly asked to pray for a patient or to lead a patient/family in prayer. The physician may feel conflicted because of uncertainty about how to be supportive to the patient, respect professional/personal boundaries, and remain true to his/her own religious beliefs. The following options attempt to respect the integrity of the physician’s spiritual/religious beliefs and be supportive of the patient’s emotional needs. Options Pray with/for the patient: It is entirely appropriate for physicians to pray if they feel comfortable doing so and such prayer is consistent with their own spirituality (see, however, ‘Pitfalls’ below). Sit with patient while patient prays: A physician who is uncomfortable praying with/for the patient may choose instead to sit quietly in supportive company while the patient prays. In this way, physicians lend support to the patient and his/her spiritual beliefs without explicitly endorsing a particular belief system themselves. Respectfully decline: Physicians who are uncomfortable with either of the above options may respectfully decline to pray with/for the patient. To avoid the patient feeling rejected, the physician may want to say: I am really sorry, I am not comfortable with that {eg leading a prayer]. In such cases, physicians are encouraged to make non-religious supportive comments: You will be in my thoughts. Note: Patients who ask for prayers may have unmet spiritual needs. A chaplain can assist patients talk or reflect upon their spiritual issues. The physician should ask the patient about referral: Would you like to visit with the hospital chaplain? Or – Would it be helpful for the hospital chaplain come and spend some time with you? Pitfalls It is inappropriate for the physician to impose his/her religious beliefs on the patient or to offer prayer in a manner that is not respectful of the patient’s beliefs. Given the differences in beliefs and practices, even within specific denominations, non-denominational prayer is safest. For example, rather than referring to Jesus, Buddha or Allah, use a more neutral and inclusive term like God. Asking God for support or that God’s will be done is safer than asking for specific outcomes, particularly if you think the patient is dying. A physician should not promise to pray for a patient if s/he has no intention of doing so. This has the potential to undermine trust in the physician-patient relationship. References Cohen C, et al. Prayer as therapy: a challenge to both religious belief and professional ethics. Hastings Center Report. 2000; May-June Issue: 40-47. Cohen C, et al. Walking a fine line: physician inquiries into patients’ religious and spiritual beliefs. Hastings Center Report. 2001; September-October Issue: 29-39. Lo B, et al. Discussing religious and spiritual issues at the end of life: a practical guide for physicians. JAMA. 2002; 287:749-754. Lo B, et al. Responding to requests regarding prayer and religious ceremonies by patients near the end of life and their families. Palliative Medicine. 2003; 6:429-31. ACGME Competencies: Interpersonal and Communication Skills, Patient Care, System-Based Practice Keyword(s): Psychosocial and Spiritual Experience: Patients, Families, and Clinicians 
#121 Oral Mucositis: Diagnosis and Assessment Author(s): Clarissa F Henson and Robert Arnold MD Background The term mucositis refers to the inflammatory response of the oral-pharyngeal mucosa resulting from systemic chemotherapy or from radiotherapy that includes the oral-pharyngeal mucosa within the radiation field. The term stomatotoxicity is specific to mucositis effecting the oral mucosa. Mucositis results from the destruction of rapidly dividing epithelial cells of the oral-pharyngeal mucosal epithelium and the secondary release of inflammatory mediators such as TNF-alpha and interleukin-1 beta. This Fast Fact discusses the diagnosis and assessment of mucositis; Fast Fact #130 discusses its prevention and treatment. The Radiation Therapy Oncology Group (RTOG) describes five grades of acute mucositis Grade 1: Injection; may experience mild pain not requiring analgesics. Grade 2: Patchy mucositis which may produce an inflammatory serosanguinitis discharge; may experience moderate pain requiring analgesia. Grade 3: Confluent fibrinous mucositis; may include severe pain requiring opioid analgesics. Grade 4: Ulceration, hemorrhage or necrosis. Grade 5: Death resulting from mucositis. Causes Both patient-related factors and treatment-related factors influence the severity of mucositis. Increased total dose of radiation, fraction size, and volume of normal tissue in the irradiated field all increase the risk of mucositis. Not all chemotherapy agents produce the same risk of mucositis; 5-fluoruracil, doxorubicin and methotrexate commonly cause mucositis while vincristine does not. The simultaneous combination of radiation and chemotherapy used in head and neck cancer will cause more intense mucositis than single-modality therapy. Patient-related factors such as the overall condition of the oral mucosa prior to therapy, pre-existing xerostomia, pre-existing collagen-vascular disorders, the underlying nutritional status, and the development of neutropenia during therapy all impact the development and severity of mucositis. In head and neck cancer, virtually all patients undergoing radiation, with or without chemotherapy, will develop grade 1 and 2 mucositis. More severe mucositis (grade 3 or higher) develops in approximately 41% of patients receiving combined radiation and chemotherapy to the head and neck and in 21% of patients receiving radiation therapy alone. Clinical Findings & Natural History Clinical signs of mucosal damage and cell death appear after the first 1 to 2 weeks of radiation therapy and as early as 3 days after chemotherapy. Initial mucosal damage results in patchy erythema, edema, atrophy and whitening of the mucosal tissue with increased sensitivity—patients report a burning sensation in the mouth. Further loss of mucosal epithelium becomes most prominent in the fourth or fifth week of standard fractionation radiation resulting in fibrinous exudation, confluent inflammation, and ulceration ( see Fast Facts#66 , 67 ). The mouth sores and swelling can lead to significant oral pain, pain with swallowing, weight loss and dehydration. Mucosal damage predisposes the patient to oral superinfection leading to further pain and alterations in taste and appetite and decreased quality of life. Resolution of oral mucositis occurs several weeks after the completion of RT and chemotherapy. Assessment A thorough assessment of the patient with mucositis should include: Pain assessment to include thorough review of analgesics used, effect and toxicities. Nutritional assessment. Quality of life assessment including screening for depression. Complete oral examination; assessment for local fungal ( see Fast Fact #147 ), bacterial, or viral infections. References Bernier J, Domenge C, Ozsahin M, et al. Postoperative irradiation with or without concomitant chemotherapy for locally advanced head and neck cancer. N Eng J Med. 2004; 350:1945-1952. Cooper JS, Pajak TF, Forastiere AA, et al. Postoperative concurrent radiotherapy and chemotherapy for high-risk squamous-cell carcinoma of the head and neck. N Engl J Med. 2004; 350:1937-1944. Fu K, et al. A Radiation Therapy Oncology Group (RTOG) phase III randomized study to compare hyperfractionation and two variants of accelerated fractionation to standard fractionation radiotherapy for head and neck squamous cell carcinomas: first report of RTOG 9003. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys. 2000; 48:7-16. ACGME Competencies: Medical Knowledge, Patient Care Keyword(s): Non-Pain Symptoms and Syndromes 
#122 Palliative Care and ICU Care: Pre-Admission Assessment Author(s): Richard A Mularski MD and Molly L Osborne MD Background What are the indications for Intensive Care Unit (ICU) admission in the chronically and/or terminally ill and how can one integrate palliative care into the daily interdisciplinary agenda? A good approach is to determine the patient-centered goals of care and then decide if ICU care will help promote or detract from these goals. The use of a pre-admission checklist can be helpful to determine the appropriateness of ICU therapy and to initiate communication about goals and preferences before a trial of ICU care. With use of a complementary strategy after admission, the patient can benefit from a care plan that integrates palliation into the daily agenda and anticipates needs. This Fast Fact will discuss the pre-ICU-admission assessment of patients with advanced illnesses; Fast Fact #123 will discuss ongoing ICU assessment of these patients to ensure appropriate symptom management and medical decision-making. Pre-Admission ICU Checklist Clarify the underlying medical condition and possibilities with ICU treatment: What is/are the underlying chronic fatal illness disease(s)? What has been the clinical course of the chronic illness over the past few months/year? What was the patient’s functional status and quality of life in the weeks preceding admission? What are the acute illnesses and conditions that the ICU might improve? What interventions do you expect will be required in the first 48 hours? What do you foresee as the best possible outcome from treatment in ICU: Cure the acute process with return to baseline function (e.g. pneumonia). Cure or improve the acute process but the patient will likely have a reduced functional capacity permanently (e.g. large stroke). Is there prognostic information to guide you/patient/family in decision making? Address and document decision-making with patient/family/surrogate: Does the patient have decision-making capacity ( see Fast Fact #55 )? Does the patient have an advance care planning document or a legally designated agent? Who are the important people that assist the patient in decision making? With or without an advance care planning document, has the patient or surrogate expressed clear goals of care with their physician in the recent past or during the current illness? Discuss and document ICU-based and patient-focused goals and preferences: Review what therapeutic trials and palliative care issues can be addressed by an interdisciplinary ICU team; consider whether needs can be met in alternative care settings. Document advance care planning and do not resuscitate orders ( see Fast Facts #23 , #24 ). Agree upon specific, time-limited, ICU goals (e.g. three days trial of mechanical ventilation). Identify physical symptoms and develop a treatment plan for palliation. Coordinate interdisciplinary communication & time reappraisal of therapy and goals: Meet with ICU team members to review goals of care, symptoms, family needs, etc. Document goals of care and details of decision making in medical record. Schedule a time to assess clinical response and whether goals need to be changed. References Back AL, Arnold RM, Quill T. Hope for the best, and prepare for the worst. Ann Intern Med. 2003; 138(5):439-43. Mularski RA, Osborne ML. End-of-life care in the critically ill geriatric population. Crit Care Clin. 2003; 19:793-810. Mularski RA, Bascom P, Osborne ML. Educational agendas for interdisciplinary end-of-life curricula. Crit Care Med. 2001; 29(2 Suppl):N16-23. (Copyright permission to reproduce modified checklist obtained from Lippincott June 2004.) ACGME Competencies: Medical Knowledge, System-Based Practice Keyword(s): Non-Pain Symptoms and Syndromes 
#123 Palliative Care and ICU Care: Daily ICU Care Plan Checklist Author(s): Richard A Mularski MD and Molly L Osborne MD Background A pre-admission checklist ( see Fast Fact #122 ) can be used before intensive care unit (ICU) admission to initiate communication about goals and preferences for an ICU trial. An ICU daily care plan checklist can be used to promote palliative care, simultaneously with curative or life-prolonging therapies. The checklist can help clarify the goals of care for the ICU team, consultants, patients, and significant others and serve as a vehicle for quality improvement. Palliative ICU Daily Care Plan Checklist Address short-term medical progress and goals: Assess whether specific criteria toward progress has been met (e.g. mental status or ventilator needs). Has there been improvement, stability, or worsening in the past 24 hours? Have there been clinical changes that will impact the patient’s ability to meet desired clinical goals (e.g. new GI bleeding)? Review interventions that may be needed in the next 48 hours and set overt criteria to measure progress (e.g. objective indicators of progress towards ventilator weaning). Use this information to review goals and determine if there are changes in prognosis that can guide you/patient/family in decision making. Address patient symptoms and psychosocial needs: Review progress in managing current symptoms and psychosocial needs (patient and family). Identify existing or new physical symptoms and psychosocial needs; discuss among team members (e.g. patient depression, family stress). Develop a treatment plan for each symptom/need for the next 24 hours. Identify both ICU and non-ICU resources to assist in care plan (e.g. palliative care nurse, clinical psychologist, etc.) and clarify roles for members of the interdisciplinary team. Clarify understanding and coordinate patient/family communication: Review patient/family understanding and concerns about diagnosis, prognosis, possible outcomes, and details of above items. Inquire if the patient or significant others have new information or new perspectives that can help clarify the understanding of the patient’s goals and preferences. Decide if goals of care need refinement or change. Agree on specific criteria for reassessment of clinical responses and goals. Determine what new information needs to be communicated within next 24 hours. Agree on who and how the team will communicate with family/patient today (e.g. attending will meet with family at 3 PM; resident will attend then call out-of-town relative after meeting). Document care plan and coordinate follow-up and next day’s assessment: Document clinical status, symptoms, daily goals of care, and details of decision making. Change orders as necessary (e.g. new do-not-resuscitate order). Schedule next meeting for interdisciplinary team that includes patient (if able) and family to update goals, medical evaluation, responses to current therapy, and future plans. Suggestion for Faculty - Improving the Process of Care Establish a written checklist containing the above elements that can be completed during daily rounds and entered into the medical record. References Curtis JR, Rubenfeld GD, eds. Managing Death in the ICU: The Transition from Cure to Comfort. New York, NY: Oxford University Press; 2000. Lilly CM, De Meo DL, Sonna LA, et al. An intensive communication intervention for the critically ill. Am J Med. 2000; 109(6):469-75. Mularski RA. Pain management in the intensive care unit. Crit Care Clin. 2004; 20:381-401. Mularski RA, Bascom P, Osborne ML. Educational agendas for interdisciplinary end-of-life curricula. Crit Care Med. 2001; 29(2 Suppl):N16-23. (Copyright permission to reproduce modified checklist obtained from Lippincott June 2004.) ACGME Competencies: Medical Knowledge, System-Based Practice Keyword(s): Non-Pain Symptoms and Syndromes 
#124 The Palliative Prognostic Score Author(s): L Scott Wilner MD and Robert Arnold MD Background Accurate prognostic information is important for patients, families and physicians. This Fast Fact reviews the Palliative Prognostic Score (PaP); see Fast Fact #125 The Palliative Performance Scale for another prognostic tool used in palliative care patients. The PaP uses the Karnofsky Performance Score (KPS) and five other criteria to generate a numerical score from 0 to 17.5 to predict 30 day survival (higher scores predict shorter survival). Validation and Use of the PaP The PaP was originally developed for use in cases of solid tumors and has been validated in large prospective studies in such patients. More recently, the PaP has been shown to be reliable in patients with various non-cancer diagnoses (e.g. organ failure syndromes, AIDS, and neurological diseases) but large-scale validation studies have not been published. There are no published data regarding the accuracy of the PaP either beyond the 30 day time frame or in direct comparison to other prognostic scoring systems. The Palliative Prognostic Score (PaP) CRITERION ASSESSMENT PARTIAL SCORE Dyspnea No Yes 0 1 Anorexia No Yes 0 1.5 Kamofsky Performance Status > 30 10 - 20 0 2.5 Clinical Prediction of Survivial (weeks) >12 11-12 7-10 5-6 3-4 1-2 0 2 2.5 4.5 6 8.5 Total WBC (x10 9 /L < 8.5 8.6 - 11 >11 0 0.5 1.5 Lymphocyte Percentage 20 - 40% 12 - 19.9% < 12% 0 1 2.5 RISK GROUP A B C 30 DAY SURVIVAL >70% 30 - 70% < 30% TOTAL SCORE 0 - 5.5 5.6 - 11 11.1 - 17.5 References Glare P, Eychmueller S, Virik K. The use of the palliative prognostic score in patients with diagnoses other than cancer. J Pain Symp Manage. 2003; 26(4):883-885. Glare P, Virik K. Independent validation of Palliative Prognostic Score in terminally ill patients referred to a hospital-based palliative medicine consultation service. J Pain Symp Manage. 2001; 22(5):891???898. Maltoni M, Nanni O, Pirovano M, et al. Successful validation of the palliative prognostic score in terminally ill cancer patients. J Pain Symp Manage. 1999; 17(4):240-247. Pirovano M, Maltoni M, Nanni O. A new Palliative Prognostic Score: a first step for the staging of terminally ill Cancer patients. J Pain Symp Manage. 1999; 17(4):231-239. ACGME Competencies: Patient Care, Medical Knowledge, Practice-Based Learning and Improvement Keywords: Prognosis 
#125 The Palliative Performance Scale (PPS) Author(s): L Scott Wilner MD and Robert Arnold MD Background Accurate prognostic information is important for patients, families and physicians. This Fast Fact reviews the Palliative Performance Scale; see Fast Fact #124 The Palliative Prognostic Score for another prognostic tool used in palliative care patients. The Palliative Performance Scale (PPS) uses five observer-rated domains correlated to the Karnofsky Performance Scale (100-0). The PPS is a reliable and valid tool and correlates well with actual survival and median survival time for cancer patients. It has been found useful for purposes of identifying and tracking potential care needs of palliative care patients, particularly as these needs change with disease progression. Large validation studies are still needed, as is analysis of how the PPS does, or does not, correlate with other available prognostic tools and commonly used symptom scales. PALLIATIVE PERFORMANCE SCALE (PPS) Survival post-admission to an inpatient palliative unit, all diagnoses (Virik 2002). Days until inpatient death following admission to an acute hospice unit, diagnoses not specified (Anderson 1996). Survival post admission to an inpatient palliative unit, cancer patients only (Morita 1999). References Anderson F, Downing GM, Hill J. Palliative Performance Scale (PPS): a new tool. J Palliat Care. 1996; 12(1): 5-11. Morita T, Tsunoda J, Inoue S, et al. Validity of the Palliative Performance Scale from a survival perspective. J Pain Symp Manage . 1999; 18(1):2-3. Virik K, Glare P. Validation of the Palliative Performance Scale for inpatients admitted to a palliative care unit in Sydney, Australia. J Pain Symp Manage. 2002; 23(6):455-7. ACGME Competencies: Medical Knowledge, Patient Care Keywords: Prognosis 
#126 Pain Assessment in the Cognitively Impaired Author(s): L Scott Wilner MD and Robert Arnold MD Background The inability of cognitively impaired patients to communicate information about pain places them at high risk for inadequate pain control. Two common risk groups in palliative care include: Patients with underlying brain pathology such as dementia, Parkinson’s disease, stroke, or developmental abnormalities ( see Fast Fact #192 ). Patients receiving sedating medications such as ICU patients receiving sedative/hypnotics to control anxiety/agitation from mechanical ventilation. General Strategies Recommended strategies to assess pain in these patients include the following: Ask the patient: many patients who appear cognitively impaired may still be able to provide useful information concerning pain. Interview the caregivers and family: patterns of particular behaviors may have developed that indicate pain (e.g. placing a hand on the forehead for headache). Review the medical record for known pain-inducing pathology: for instance a diabetic patient with painful neuropathy that was manifest when the patient was cognitively intact. Complete a physical examination and directed laboratory studies to assess for common pain-inducing problems (e.g. fracture, urinary tract infection). Pain Scales In addition to these measures, clinicians should use a validated pain rating system for the cognitively impaired. Such rating systems focus on the following observational items: Facial expression Body posture Vocalizations Appetite Interactivity Representative examples of pain rating scales for the cognitively impaired, along with background information concerning validation studies and clinical experience can be found at: http://www.healthcare.uiowa.edu/igec/tools/categoryMenu.asp?categoryID=7. Doloplus-2 scale www.doloplus.com (1997) Assessment of Discomfort in Dementia Protocol (1999) Pain Assessment in Advanced Dementia (2003) Checklist of Nonverbal Pain Indicators (2000) Pain Assessment for the Demented Elderly (2003) Pain Assessment for Seniors with Limited Ability to Communicate (2004) Abbey Pain Scale (2004) To date, there are no trials comparing these different instruments. Thus, clinicians should choose one tool and use it consistently to ensure uniformity among health care providers and across shifts. References Closs SJ, Barr B, Briggs M, et al. A comparison of five pain assessment scales for nursing home residents with varying degrees of Cognitive impairment. J Pain and Symptom Manage. 2004; 27(3):196-205. Feldt K. The Checklist of Nonverbal Pain Indicators (CNPI). Pain Manage Nursing. 2000; 1(1):13-21. Frampton M. Experience assessment and management of pain in people with dementia. Age and Ageing. 2003; 32(3):248-251. ACGME Competencies: Patient Care, Medical Knowledge Keyword(s): Pain – Evaluation 
#127 Substance Use Disorders in the Palliative Care Patient, 2nd ed Author(s): Gary M Reisfield MD, Gabriel D Paulian MD, and George R Wilson MD Background The spectrum of substance use disorders (SUDs) are characterized by increasing degrees of craving, compulsive use, loss of control, and continued use despite harm ( see Fast Fact #68 ). Addiction is understood to be a disease with complex genetic, neurobiological, psychosocial, and behavioral determinants. If not properly managed an SUD can: 1) complicate the diagnosis and treatment of psychological (e.g. depression) and physical (e.g. pain) symptoms; 2) compromise compliance with the palliative treatment plan; 3) impair a stressed social support network; 4) weaken trust in patient-physician/nurse relationships; and 5) promote “chemical coping” strategies during periods of stress and decision-making. The prevalence of SUDs in palliative care is unknown, but likely reflects that of the general population in which alcoholism and abuse of prescription and non-prescription drugs is common. Bruera (1995) reported a prevalence of alcoholism of 27% in patients admitted to a tertiary care palliative medicine unit. Far from being a source of pleasure, SUDs are more commonly a source of suffering for affected individuals and their loved ones. Addressing addiction may allow for: 1) preservation/restoration of damaged social supports; 2) restoration of self-respect and dignity; 3) accomplishment of end-of-life work through recovery; and 4) improvement in quality of life for patients and families. Substance Use Disorders and Pain Management Patients with a current or past history of an SUD are particularly challenging. Patients who are in recovery are often fearful of using opioids, even in the setting of severe pain near the end-of-life. Conversely, the ability to complete a pain assessment and use opioids effectively is challenging in patients with an active SUD. Listed below are suggested management techniques in patients with a past or current SUD. Complete a thorough substance use history. Distinguish between those who have active SUDs from those who are at-risk or in recovery. Explain to patients why your knowledge of this information is important for their care. Be empathic and nonjudgmental. Encourage participation in recovery programs (e.g. 12-step) if the patient is willing and physically able. Consider consultation with an addictions/mental health professional. Formalize a treatment plan and coordinate it with all other involved health professionals. Consider use of a written opioid agreement with carefully defined patient and provider expectations; this may give motivated individuals a sense of control over their SUD. Components of an opioid agreement include: establishing a single opioid prescriber, using a single pharmacy, employing pill counts and periodic urine drug testing. Treat pain aggressively; poorly treated pain can increase substance abuse behaviors ( see Fast Fact #69 ). Use non-opioid analgesics and non-pharmacological measures to their full potential. Use opioids at appropriate doses and at appropriate intervals. Titrate long-acting opioids to minimize the need for short-acting opioids. Note: opioid-tolerant patients may need larger than ‘usual’ doses. Address anxiety with counseling, antidepressants and, if necessary, judicious use of benzodiazepines; this has been shown to reduce illicit drug use in a hospice population (Podymow 2006). Monitor closely; frequent contact allows for close patient observation and prescription of limited quantities of opioids. Careful monitoring will usually distinguish whether deteriorating function is due to substance abuse or disease progression. Recognize that addiction is a chronic, relapsing illness – and respond with increasing structure and compassion. References Bruera E, Moyano J, Seifert L, et al. The frequency of alcoholism among patients with pain due to terminal cancer. J Pain Symptom Manage. 1995; 10(8):599-603. Passik SD, Theobald DE. Managing addiction in advanced cancer patients: why bother? J Pain Symptom Manage. 2000; 19(3):229-234. Passik SD, Portenoy RK, Ricketts PL. Substance abuse issues in cancer patients. Part 1: prevalence and diagnosis. Oncology. 1998; 12(4):517-521. Passik SD, Portenoy RK, Ricketts PL. Substance abuse issues in cancer patients. Part 2: evaluation and treatment. Oncology 1998; 12(5):729-734. Podymow T, Turnbull J, Coyle D. Shelter-based palliative care for the homeless terminally ill. Palliat Med. 2006; 20(2):81-86. ACGME Competencies: Medical Knowledge, Patient Care, Practice-Based Learning and Improvement Keywords: Pain – Evaluation, Pain – Opioids, Pain – Non-Opioids, Ethics, Law, Policy Health Systems 
#128 The Speech Pathologist and Swallowing Studies Author(s): Carol Monteleoni MS, CCC-SLP Background Speech pathologists can facilitate communication among members of the medical team, and between the team and the patient/family, to make treatment decisions that honor patient wishes. Speech pathology services for symptom control to enable the individual to maintain activities of daily living and basic functional skills are reimbursable under the Medicare Hospice Benefit ( see Fast Facts #82, 87 , 90 ). Swallowing studies are used to evaluate a patient’s ability to safely ingest oral food and oral secretions, yet the role of swallowing studies to facilitate optimal care near the end of life is not clear. This Fast Fact will review the indications and contraindications for a swallowing study and the role of the speech pathologist. Potential Indications for a swallowing evaluation (Bedside or Instrumental) Acute stroke or other neurological condition affecting oral motor function. Tracheostomy or recent endotracheal extubation. Changes to oropharyngeal anatomy secondary to tumor, surgery, trauma, etc. Observed difficulty swallowing food or liquid. Recurrent upper respiratory infections or pneumonias. Reduced oral food intake; unexplained weight loss or fever. Contra-indications for swallowing evaluation (Instrumental only) Imminent death—death expected within 2 weeks ( See Fast Fact #3 ). Death expected within weeks from any progressive terminal illness. Reduced level of arousal (e.g. coma/obtundation). Types of swallowing studies Bedside dysphagia evaluation involves an in-depth feeding/swallowing history, oral peripheral examination, and trial swallows of various food consistencies. Bedside evaluation can not rule out silent aspiration. Instrumental swallowing evaluation is performed via modified barium swallow (videofluoroscopy), fiber-endoscopic evaluation of swallowing (FEES), or fiber-endoscopic evaluation of swallowing with sensory testing (FEEST). All of these instrumental assessments require the patient to be alert, cooperative, and able to follow simple commands. Speech Pathologist Role The decision to perform a swallowing evaluation should be made based on the overall goals of care and expected prognosis. Consultation with your speech pathologist prior to ordering an evaluation can help clarify how you will use any new information. If performed, the speech pathologist will evaluate the swallow and recommend feeding strategies which may include: Appropriate food consistencies. Positioning of the head and neck. Timing of meals and family involvement. Using the Speech Pathologist’s Assessment Decisions regarding feeding management should not be made based solely upon the speech pathologist’s assessment of swallowing dysfunction, which may be a sign of the final stage of life in many terminal conditions. In addition, feeding tube placement decisions in this population should not be based on the likelihood of aspiration. In patients with advanced dementia and other terminal conditions, feeding tubes have not been found to reduce the incidence of aspiration and can significantly impair the dying patient’s quality of life ( see Fast Facts #10 , 84 ). References Finucane TE, Christmas C, Travis K. Tube feeding in patients with advanced dementia. JAMA. 1999; 282:1365-1369. Levy A, Dominguez-Gasson L, Brown E, Frederick C. Technology at End of Life Questioned. The ASHA Leader. 2004; July 20: pages 1, 14. Ahronheim JC. Nutrition and hydration in the terminal patient. Clinics in Geriatrics. 1996: 12(2):379-391. Monteleoni C, Clark E. Using rapid-cycle quality improvement methodology to reduce feeding tubes in patients with advanced dementia: before and after study. BMJ. 2004; 329:491-494. ACGME Competencies: Patient Care, Medical Knowledge Keyword(s): Non-Pain Symptoms and Syndromes, Communication 
#129 Steroids in the Treatment of Bone Pain Author(s): Elizabeth Weinstein and Robert Arnold MD Background Corticosteroids are recommended as an adjuvant analgesic for cancer-related bone pain. The mechanism of action is unclear, but may be related to decreasing tumor-related edema or inhibition of prostaglandin and leukotriene synthesis. This Fast Fact discusses the use of corticosteroids for painful bone metastases; see also Fast Facts #66 , 67 , and #116 about palliative radiotherapy. Dosing The ideal corticosteroid, dose, and duration of therapy for bone pain is unknown; current practice is derived from expert opinion and anecdotal case series. One randomized controlled trial demonstrated a decrease in pain scores in patients with cancer-related pain using oral methylprednisolone 16 mg PO twice a day. Other starting dosages reported in the literature include dexamethasone 4-8 mg PO 2-3 times per day, methylprednisolone 16-32mg PO 2-3 times per day or prednisone 20-30 mg PO 2-3 times per day. Duration of Therapy The optimal duration of steroid therapy is unknown. If no benefit is seen within 5-7 days the drug should be discontinued. If beneficial, the drug should be tapered to the lowest effective dose or, if possible, discontinued to avoid long-term adverse effects. Side Effects Side effects account for discontinuation of steroids in 5% of patients. Acute side effects include thrush (~30%), edema (20%), dyspepsia and peptic ulcer diseases, psychiatric symptoms (insomnia, delirium and anxiety), and glucose intolerance. Delayed side effects from long term use include adrenal suppression, moon facies/fat redistribution, increased susceptibility to infection, osteoporosis, skin fragility and impaired wound healing. A prospective review of 373 inpatients with advanced malignant disease demonstrated that the side effect profile of dexamethasone and prednisone are similar, although at equipotent doses dexamethasone causes slightly more thrush and psychiatric symptoms and less edema, weight gain and dyspepsia. The relationship between peptic ulcer disease and steroids is controversial; in one nested case-control study it appeared correlated with concurrent NSAID use and a cumulative dose greater than 1000 mg of prednisolone or 140 mg of dexamethasone. Case reports and prospective series suggest that psychiatric symptoms are most commonly seen in middle-aged women, are directly related to dosage, and usually resolve with dose reduction. Summary Steroids are recommended for use in bone pain, but the choice of dose, duration and specific drug is largely empiric. Steroid toxicities are a concern; the duration of treatment should be minimized to reduce the risk of adverse events. Resources Berger AM, Koprowski C. Bone pain: assessment and management. In: Berger AM, Portenoy RK, Weissman DE, eds. Principles and Practice of Palliative Care and Supportive Oncology. 2nd edition. Philadelphia, PA: Lippincott, Williams and Wilkins; 2002. Pereira J. Management of bone pain. In: Portenoy RK, Bruera E, eds. Topics in Palliative Care Volume 3. New York, NY: Oxford University Press; 1998. Bruera E, Roca E, Cedaro L, et al. Action of oral methyl-prednisolone in terminal cancer patients: a prospective randomized double-blind study. Cancer Treat Rev. 1985; 69:751-754. Twycoss R. The risks and benefits of corticosteroids in advanced cancer. Drug Safety. 1994; 11(3):163-178. Hanks GW, Trueman T, Twycoss RG. Costicosteroids in terminal cancer-a prospective analysis of current practice. Postgraduate Med J. 1983; 59(697):702-706. Klein JF. Adverse psychiatric effects of systemic glucocorticoid therapy. Am Fam Phys. 1992; 46(5):1469-1474. Piper JM, Ray WA, Daugherty JR, Griffin MR. Corticosteroid use and peptic ulcer disease: role of nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs. Annals Intern Med. 1991; 114:735-740. ACGME Competencies : Medical Knowledge, Patient Care Keyword(s): Pain – Non-Opioids 
#130 Oral Mucositis: Prevention and Treatment Author(s): Clarissa Febles Henson and Robert Arnold MD Introduction Radiation and chemotherapy-induced mucositis causes pain, difficulty swallowing, and decreased oral intake. Fast Fact #121 discusses the diagnosis and assessment of mucositis; this Fast Fact focuses on prevention and general treatment of radiation (XRT) and chemotherapy-induced oral mucositis. Prevention Oral care: At least two weeks prior to the start of radiation to the head and neck region, or the use of chemotherapy that is expected to cause severe and prolonged neutropenia (e.g. for acute leukemia), patients should undergo a thorough oral/dental exam with appropriate dental extraction and repair or removal of dental prostheses. Patients should be educated on maintaining good oral hygiene including daily brushing with a soft bristle tooth brush, flossing, use of fluoride plaques, and avoiding denture use. Mouth rinses that contain a mixture of baking soda, salt and water can prevent the build-up of bacterial overgrowth and remove dead cells. Patients should avoid caustic and drying agents: alcoholic beverages, mouth rinses with alcohol, hot beverages, and acidic foods. Radiation therapy technique: Advanced radiotherapy techniques such as 3D-conformal therapy and intensity modulated therapy decrease radiation toxicity by limiting doses to the normal oral mucosa. Other modifications of XRT that decrease toxicity include using shields to block normal tissues, decreasing the radiation fraction size and shorter overall treatment time. Severe mucositis may require a 5 to 7 day radiation treatment break to allow for tissue recovery. However, a prolonged break in treatment is associated with inferior local control rates and survival. Treatment Treatment of infection: Prophylactic use of antifungal, antibacterial or antiviral medications does not decrease the incidence of mucositis. However, clinicians should consider potential super-infection, and have a low threshold to obtain cultures, especially for fungal and viral infections. Of note, viral infections such as herpes may not present with classic physical examination findings. Pain Management: Local anesthetics such as lidocaine and diphenhydramine are routinely used to relieve pain but do not provide mucosal protection nor hasten recovery. Local anesthetics decrease taste and can impact oral intake. Some patients find addition of carafate slurry or a liquid antacid to a lidocaine/diphenhydramine mixture provides temporary analgesia. Liquid oral or parenteral opioids may be required for adequate pain management ( see Fast Fact #185 ). Topical agents: A number of topical agents are available to provide symptomatic relief. These include commercial and non-commercial preparation: Gelcair, topical lidocaine, and various mixtures of lidocaine, Maalox, diphenhydramine and nystatin, etc. Reference Berger AM, Kilroy TJ. Oral Complications. In: DeVita V, et al, eds. Cancer: Principles and Practices of Oncology. 6th Edition. Philadelphia, PA: Lippincott Williams & Wilkins; 2001. ACGME Competencies: Medical Knowledge, Patient Care Keyword(s): Non-Pain Symptoms and Syndromes 
#131 The Physician as Family Member Author(s): Robert Arnold MD Introduction Caring for a dying patient who has a physician-family member provides challenges and opportunities. Families often turn to their physician-family member for help when a relative is critically ill. The physician-family member is often utilized to obtain or interpret medical information for the patient and family. A physician-family member, through their attention to detail and sense of responsibility, can serve a positive advocacy role for the patient, leading to improved compliance and decreased risk of medical errors However, these virtues may at times cause conflict with the healthcare team. Increased knowledge of facts does not necessarily translate into emotional comprehension. The physician-family member’s awareness of the limitations of the health care system may produce a heightened state of anxiety in all involved parties. Physicians often have the tendency, through training and personality style, to want to 'take charge,” at a time when their own emotional state may be compromised. The family may have unrealistic expectations of the family member who is a physician. Suggested Approach to Care Review and explore the physician-family member's relationship to the patient. Understanding the physician-family member’s role may make it easier for you to empathize with their situation. In situations when the physician family member is conflicted about their different roles, healthcare providers may help them think through what they want their role to be. Sometimes, the physician-family member needs permission to 'just be a son/daughter.” Sometimes the family also needs to be reminded to let the physician be a family member rather than a doctor. Explicitly negotiate the physician-family member relationship with the care team. Discuss the following care issues: How would the physician family member like to be addressed? What access is to be provided to reading the chart or reviewing X-rays? What is the preferred method and frequency of communication? How does the physician-family member wish to be involved in medical decision-making? Issues of control and trust are typically central to these discussions. Given the complexity of the relationship, it should be re-evaluated frequently. Self-care for the care team. Healthcare providers should attend to their own emotions; interacting with a physician-family member is typically stressful, raising issues of personal competency and over-identification with the physician-family member. Summary Recognize that physician-family members are both alike and different from all other family members. They are likely to have intense and complex emotions to their loved one's illness. Physician-family members need to be treated like all other family members; they will benefit from your expertise, guidance, and emotional support. On the other hand, physician family members are highly informed and active “consumers.” They are likely to want more control and information than other family members. References Stone D, Patton B, Heen S. Difficult conversations : how to discuss what matters most. New York, NY: Penguin Group; 1999. Klein M. Too close for comfort. CMAJ. 1997; 156(1):53-55. Chen R, Rhodes L, Green L. Family physicians' personal experience of their fathers' health care. J Fam Pract. 2001; 50(9):762-766. Chen FM, Feudtner C, Rhodes LA, Green LA. Role conflicts of physician and their family members: rules but no rulebook. West J Med. 2001; 174(4):236-39. ACGME Competencies: Professionalism, Interpersonal and Communications Skills Keyword(s): Psychosocial and Spiritual Experience: Patients, Families, and Clinicians 
#132 Ketamine Use in Palliative Care Author(s): Eric Prommer MD Background Ketamine is FDA approved as a parenterally administered, rapid-acting dissociative general anesthetic. However, in the past 10 years there have been numerous reports of the use of ketamine for pain control, administered via various routes. This Fast Fact reviews the use of ketamine in palliative care as an analgesic. Mechanism of Action The N-methyl-D-aspartate/glutamate receptor (NMDA) is a calcium channel closely involved in the development of central (dorsal horn) sensitization. This channel has a role in opioid-resistant pain, neuropathic pain, allodynia, and hyperalgesia. Ketamine enters and blocks the open channel at a phencyclidine site, thereby inhibiting the excitatory effects of glutamate and aspartate. Ketamine also interacts with nicotinic, muscarinic, and opioid receptors. Pharmacology As an anesthetic agent ketamine is given IV or IM. However, for pain, the parenteral solution of ketamine can be delivered at much lower doses by the oral, intranasal, transdermal, rectal, and subcutaneous routes. Onset of analgesia is 15-30 minutes by subcutaneous or oral routes. Duration of action is 15 minutes to 2 hours when administered by the IM or subcutaneous route, possibly longer orally. Ketamine is physically stable when mixed with morphine, low-dose dexamethasone, haloperidol, and metoclopramide. Drugs that interact with CYP34A have the potential to affect ketamine metabolism (e.g. azole antifungals, macrolide antibiotics, HIV protease inhibitors, and cyclosporin). Side Effects Undesirable effects of high dose ketamine used for general anesthesia (1-2 mg/kg IV or 6.5-13 mg/kg IM) include psychotomimetic phenomena (dysphoria, blunted affect, psychomotor retardation, nightmares, hallucinations), excessive salivation, and tachycardia. Side effects at the lower doses used for pain are dose dependent, with dissociative feelings (“spaced out”), nausea, sedation, and hallucinations reported more frequently at higher doses. Analgesic Effectiveness There is an absence of large controlled trials supporting ketamine as an analgesic for cancer or neuropathic pain, but there is a large body of case reports and uncontrolled trials. Two small randomized controlled trials reported decreased morphine use and reduced neuropathic pain intensity. However, a recent systematic review found insufficient evidence that ketamine improves the effectiveness of opioid treatment in cancer pain (1). Titration Schedule There are no studies comparing various titration or dosing schedules, nor routes of administration. Suggested algorithms for have been proposed (see references). Depending on the clinical setting, airway monitoring and availability of resuscitation equipment may be appropriate. Note: clinicians with limited experience in using ketamine should seek expert consultation to develop an appropriate treatment and patient monitoring plan. Summary Low-dose ketamine (at sub-anesthetic doses) can be considered for use in the palliative care setting for pain refractory to opioids and adjuvant analgesics. References Bell RF, Eccleston C, Kalso E. Ketamine as adjuvant to opioids for cancer pain. A qualitative systematic review. J Pain Symptom Manage. 2003; 26(3):867-75. Kotlinska-Lemieszek A, Luczak J. Subanesthetic ketamine: an essential adjuvant for intractable cancer pain. J Pain Symptom Manage. 2004; 28(2):100-2. Fine PG. Low-dose ketamine in the management of opioid nonresponsive terminal cancer pain. J Pain Symptom Manage. 1999; 17(4):296-300. Fisher K, Hagen NA. Analgesic effect of oral ketamine in chronic neuropathic pain of spinal origin: a case report. J Pain Symptom Manage. 1999; 18(1):61-6. ACGME Competencies: Medical Knowledge, Patient Care Keyword(s): Pain – Non-Opioids 
#133 Non-Oral Hydration in Palliative Care Author(s): Robin Fainsinger MD Background At the center of the debate with regard to hydration in terminally ill patients is the desire to maintain comfort and avoid unnecessary/distressing procedures. There is no controversy that terminally ill patients should be encouraged to maintain adequate oral hydration for as long as possible. However there is debate and controversy around the use of parenteral hydration. This Fast Fact discusses medical decision-making about non-oral hydration in palliative care settings; Fast Fact #134 discusses techniques of hydration. Arguments Against Hydration Comatose patients do not experience symptom distress. Parenteral fluids may prolong dying. With less urine there is less need to void and use catheters. With less gastrointestinal fluid there can be less nausea and vomiting. With less respiratory tract secretions there can be less cough and pulmonary edema. Dehydration can help reduce distressing edema or ascites. Dehydration may be a “natural” anesthetic to ease the dying process. Parenteral hydration can be uncomfortable (e.g. needles/catheters) and limit patient mobility. Arguments For Hydration Dehydration can lead to pre-renal azotemia, which in turn can lead to accumulation of drug metabolites (notably opioids), leading to delirium, myoclonus and seizures. Hydration can reverse these symptoms in some patients leading to improved comfort. There is no evidence that fluids prolong the dying process. Providing hydration can maintain the appearance of “doing something,” even though there may be no medical value, and thus ease family anxiety around the time of death. Ethical/Legal Issues In the United States, the following ethical/legal standards exist: Competent patients or their surrogate decision-makers can accept or refuse hydration based on relevant information. Non-oral hydration is considered a medical intervention, not ordinary care. As such, there is no legal or ethical imperative to provide a medical intervention unless the benefits outweigh the burdens. Recommendation There is research literature to support both the use of, and withholding of, non-oral hydration in patients near death; thus, there is no consensus on the single best approach to care. Key issues to be considered when determining the role of non-oral hydration include the following: Expressed wishes of the patient or surrogate decision-maker regarding use of hydration. Patient-defined goals; the presence of a specific goal may direct the clinician to use hydration as a means to improve delirium and potentially delay death. Symptom burden: symptoms related to total body water excess may improve by withholding hydration, while delirium may lessen with hydration. Burden to the patient and caregivers of maintaining the non-oral route of hydration. Family distress concerning withholding hydration/nutrition. When in doubt, a time limited hydration trial is an appropriate recommendation. Clinician Self-Reflection Finally, it is important to recognize that health care providers often have biases for or against non-oral hydration near the end-of- life. Self-reflection upon these biases is crucial to help patients and families make decisions that are based on the best interests and goals of the patient/family unit. References Fainsinger RL. Hydration. In: Ripamonti C, Bruera E, eds. Gastrointestinal Symptoms in Advanced Cancer Patients. New York, NY: Oxford University Press; 2002. MacDonald N. Ethical considerations in feeding or hydrating advanced cancer patients. In: Ripamonti C, Bruera E, eds. Gastrointestinal Symptoms in Advanced Cancer Patients. New York, NY: Oxford University Press; 2002. Lawlor PG. Delirium and dehydration: Some fluid for thought? Supp Care Cancer. 2002; 10:445-454. Sarhill N, Walsh D, Nelson K, Davies M. Evaluation and treatment of cancer related fluid deficits: volume depletion and dehydration. Supp Care Cancer. 2001; 9:408-419. Bruera E, Sala R, Rico M, et al. Effects of parenteral hydration in terminally ill cancer patients: a preliminary study. J Clin Oncol. 2005; 23:2366-2371. ACGME Competencies: Medical Knowledge, Patient Care Keyword(s): Ethics, Law, Policy Health Systems; Non-Pain Symptoms and Syndromes 
#134 Non-Oral Hydration Techniques in Palliative Care Author(s): Robin Fainsinger MD Background The decision to use or withhold non-oral hydration near the end-of-life is complex ( see Fast Fact #133 ). This Fast Fact reviews the technical aspects of providing non-oral hydration. Fast Fact #190 discusses the related issue of parenteral nutrition in advanced cancer patients. Nasogastric and Gastrostomy Tubes The use of enteral feeding tubes to provide nutrition is beyond the scope of this Fast Fact ( see Fast Facts #10 , 84 ). If already in place, enteral feeding tubes provide easy access for supplemental hydration. Placement of enteral tubes solely for hydration management in the last few weeks of life is generally not indicated, as other methods of hydration can be provided (see below). Intravenous Hydration T his method includes hydration via peripheral or central catheters. For short-term use, especially as a time-limited trial, intravenous hydration is a reasonable step. However, both peripheral and central catheters are plagued with problems of site selection, placement, and maintenance; clot formation; local skin irritation; and local or systemic bacterial infections. Hypodermoclysis (subcutaneous infusions) Hypodermoclysis offers a number of advantages compared to the intravenous route due to greater ease of site access, the possibility of temporary disconnection to facilitate patient mobility, and ease and suitability for home administration. Thrombocytopenia may be a relative contraindication. Solutions with electrolytes should be used (e.g. 0.9% sodium chloride), as non-electrolyte solutions (e.g. 5% dextrose) can draw fluid into the interstitial space. Continuous infusion rates up to 120 ml/hr have been reported; patients can tolerate boluses of up to 500 ml/hr two to three times per day. Traditionally the use of hyaluronidase to promote absorption was recommended. More recent experience has demonstrated that most patients will achieve good absorption of subcutaneous fluids without hyaluronidase. Winged infusion sets with 25 – 27 gauge needles are recommended. Check the site frequently for redness, irritation, excessive edema, or a dislodged needle. If there is a problem with absorption it recommended to a) slow the infusion rate and consider using an infusion pump, or b) consider dividing the total volume into two separate subcutaneous sites. Rectal Hydration (proctoclysis) Rectal hydration is an alternative only when other resources are not available. A 22 French nasogastric catheter can be inserted approximately 40 cm into the rectum. The patient can be positioned as for any rectal procedure. Tap water can be used, and the rectal infusion increased from 100 ml to a maximum of 400 ml per hour, unless fluid leakage occurs before the maximum volume is achieved. The majority of patients can successfully tolerate this approach at a volume of 100 to 200 ml per hour. Fluid Volumes For all routes, a reasonable goal is 1-1.5 L/day in fluid volume. References Fainsinger RL. Hydration. In: Ripamonti C, Bruera E, eds. Gastrointestinal Symptoms in Advanced Cancer Patients. New York, NY: Oxford University Press; 2002. Steiner N, Bruera E. Methods of hydration in palliative care patients. J Palliat Care. 1998; 14(2):6-13. Centeno C, Bruera E. Subcutaneous hydration with no hyaluronidase in patients with advanced cancer. J Pain Symptom Manage. 1999; 17(5):305-306. Bruera E, Pruvost M, Schoeller T. Proctoclysis for hydration of terminally ill cancer patients. J Pain Symptom Manage. 1998; 15:216-219. Lanuke K, Fainsinger RL, de Moissac D. Hydration management at the end-of- life. J Palliat Med. 2004; 7(2):257-263. Edmonton Regional Palliative Care Program. Hypodermoclysis (HDC) Administration Protocol for Palliative Care Patients. Edmonton, Alberta: 2003. Available at: http://www.palliative.org/PC/ClinicalInfo/Clinical%20Practice%20Guidelines/PDF%20files/3A7%20Hypodermoclysis%20Admin%20Protocol%20for%20PC%20Patients.htm Dalal S, Bruera E. Dehydration in cancer patients: to treat or not to treat. J Support Oncol. 2004; 2:467-487. ACGME Competencies: Medical Knowledge, Patient Care, Systems Based Practice Keyword(s): Non-Pain Symptoms and Syndromes 
#135 Neoplastic Meningitis Author(s) Fareeha Siddiqui MD, Lisa Marr MD, and David E Weissman MD Background Neoplastic meningitis (NM) – also known as leptomeningeal metastases, meningeal carcinomatosis, or leukemic meningitis, is a common oncologic complication representing spread of tumor cells to the subarachnoid space (SAS). It is a complication which often portends a very short prognosis. Epidemiology NM is found in 20% of cancer patients at autopsy. Among solid tumors, NM is common in breast cancer, small cell lung cancer, and melanoma while rare in gastrointestinal and gynecologic cancers. 90% of solid tumor patients with NM have widespread metastatic disease. NM is found in 40-50% of patients with hematological malignancies, mostly commonly the acute leukemias and high-grade lymphomas (such as large cell and Burkitt lymphomas). Signs/Symptoms Tumor reaches the SAS by hematogenous spread via arachnoid vessels or direct invasion along nerve roots. Cancer cells in the subarachnoid space have the potential to: a) settle in dependent portions of the neuraxis (base of brain/cranial nerves or lower spinal canal), b) grow into the surface of the brain and fill the sulci, and c) block normal paths of cerebral spinal fluid (CSF) flow. Thus, the hallmark of diagnosis is neurological signs/symptoms at more than one level of the neuraxis: Brain – headaches, nausea/vomiting, seizure, hydrocephalus. Cranial Nerves – diplopia, hearing loss, facial numbness, dysphagia, dysphonia. Spinal – radicular pain, weakness (usually legs), parenthesis, bladder and bowel dysfunction. Diagnosis Lumbar puncture typically reveals a CSF profile of high opening pressure, low glucose, high protein, and lymphocytic pleocytosis. Sensitivity for finding malignant cells is 50- 70% for one sample, increasing to 80-90% with three samples. MRI can identify nodular/bulky areas of disease, hydrocephalus, and/or enhancement of the cortex/tentorium if tumor growth along the sulci leads to neovascularization. NM commonly causes abnormal CSF flow; this can be demonstrated by a radionucleotide cisternogram. Prognosis and Treatment Patients with breast cancer or hematological malignancies, that have not been extensively treated with chemotherapy, have a reasonable chance at remission of their CNS disease if their systemic cancer can also be controlled. In contrast, patients with other cancers (e.g. lung, melanoma) typically have a dismal prognosis (1-4 months) with or without treatment. Treatment options include chemotherapy and/or radiation. Unlike spinal cord compression or brain metastases, there is no accepted role for corticosteroids except in lymphoid malignances. Radiation: Either cranio-spinal irradiation (entire spinal column) or focused radiation therapy to sites of bulky or symptomatic areas (e.g. cauda equina for radicular leg pain). Chemotherapy: Options include systemic high-dose chemotherapy (Ara-C or Methotrexate) intrathecal chemotherapy (1-2 times per week) administered either by repeated lumbar puncture or via repeated puncture of an implanted intraventricular reservoir (e.g. Ommaya reservoir). Commonly used intrathecal drugs include methotrexate or Ara-C. Summary For many patients, NM represents a pre-terminal diagnosis and no anti-neoplastic therapy is warranted. Establishing the diagnosis in such patients may be important to help prognosticate and to anticipate future neurological problems (e.g. seizures, headache, radicular pain). The decision whether or not to begin anti-neoplastic treatment should be made in consultation with a medical, radiation, or neurooncologist. References Wasserstrom WR, Glass JP, Posner JB. Diagnosis and treatment of leptomeningeal metastases from solid tumors. Cancer. 1982; 49:759-772. Grossman SA, Trupm DL, Chen ECP, Thopson G, Cargo EE. Cerebrospinal fluid flow abnormalities in patients with neoplastic meningitis. Am J Med. 1982; 73:641-647. Kaplan JG, DeSouza TG, Farkash A, et al. Leptomeningeal metastases: comparison of clinical features and laboratory data of solid tumors, lymphomas and leukemias. J Neurooncol. 1990; 9:225-9. Demopoulos A, et al. Leptomeningeal metastases: a review. Curr Neurol Neurosci Rep. 2004; 4(3):196-204. ACGME Competencies: Medical Knowledge, Patient Care Keyword(s): Prognosis 
#136 Medical Futility Author(s): Joy E Cuezze MD and Christian T Sinclair MD Background The term ‘medical futility’ is commonly used by health professionals to discuss the appropriateness of a medical treatment option. Texas and California have defined statewide ‘futility’ policies and increasingly hospitals and nursing homes are developing their own futility policies. This Fast Fact will discuss the current understanding of the term futility. The Problem with ‘Futility’ The public, policymakers, ethicists, and the medical profession have been unable to agree on a clear, concise definition of futility that can be applied to all medical situations. One commonly used definition is that a futile intervention is one that a) is unlikely to be of any benefit to a particular patient in a particular medical situation, and b) will not achieve the patient’s intended goals. The sticking point in all futility definitions is the concept of benefit, as the perception of benefit is highly subjective. Physicians, patients and families often have very different views on what is potentially beneficial. For example, although a physician may believe that renal dialysis in an elderly demented patient is futile, the family that views preservation of life at all costs as part of their cultural ethos, may view dialysis as an important intervention to continue life. Furthermore, medical futility can be easily misunderstood as health care rationing. While economic issues may impact shared decision making, the ultimate question is not How much does this therapy cost? Rather, it is Do the advantages of this therapy outweigh the disadvantages in a given patient? Types of ‘Futility’ Two types of futility have been described. Quantitative futility refers to the intervention that has a very small chance of benefiting the patient; the most commonly used number is less than 1% chance of success. The term qualitative futility describes a situation in which the quality of benefit an intervention will produce is exceedingly poor. However, neither approach is adequate as there is no consensus on either numeric thresholds for quantitative futility nor shared understanding of what constitutes qualitative benefits. Physician Obligations Physicians are not legally, professionally or ethically required to offer medically futile treatments, as defined by the standard of care of the medical community . Ethics committees, hospitals, and local/state medical organizations can provide resources to understand medical futility and professional responsibilities in one’s practice area. Suggestions Check with your health care institution regarding the presence of an existing futility policy. Avoid using the term ‘futility’ in discussion with patients/families. Rather, speak in terms of ‘benefits’/’burdens’ of treatment and patient or family-specific goals of care. Involve a palliative care and/or ethics consultant in any situation where ‘futility’ will be invoked as a process step in formulating decisions. References Doty WD, Walker RM. Medical Futility. Clinical Cardiology. 2000; 23(2 Suppl 2):II6-II16. Schneiderman LJ, Jecker NS, Jonsen AR. Medical futility: its meaning and ethical implications. Ann Int Med. 1990; 112:949-954. Cantor MD, et al. Do not resuscitate orders and medical futility. Arch Intern Med. 2003; 163:2689-2694. ACGME Competencies: Systems Based Practice, Professionalism, Patient Care Keyword(s): Ethics, Law, Policy Health System 
#137 Carcinoid Syndrome: Symptom Management Author(s): Stacey Shaffer and Robert Arnold MD Background The carcinoid syndrome (CS) is a symptom complex resulting from hormone secretion in patients with carcinoid tumors. Carcinoid tumors typically grow slowly, and patients may live for many years following diagnosis. CS becomes manifest only when sufficient concentration of hormones reach the systemic circulation, most commonly in the presence of liver metastases. This Fast Fact will focus on managing the symptoms of CS. Symptoms and Causes The CS includes the complex of: flushing, diarrhea, abdominal cramping, cyanosis, bronchoconstriction, and symptoms of right heart failure. Specific symptoms depend on the hormones the tumor secretes. Serotonin-secreting tumors cause diarrhea and cramping; bradykinin and histamine secretion lead to flushing and cyanosis. Carcinoid tumors may also produce somatostatin, norepinephrine, dopamine, gastrin, vasoactive intestinal peptide, and other hormones. Drugs that block the hormonal secretion can help to control the symptoms of carcinoid syndrome. Somatostatin Analogs These drugs are the treatment of choice for CS. Three formulations are available: short-acting octreotide (continuous infusion or 50-500 mcg TID, IV or subcutaneously); depot octreotide (20 mg monthly, intramuscularly); and lanreotide (30 mg every other week intramuscularly). 50-70% of patients experience a significant reduction of diarrhea and flushing episodes within seven days. Efficacy and side effect profiles for the three preparations are similar. Side effects include pain at the injection site, abdominal bloating, fatigue, transient fever, elevated serum glucose, and asymptomatic biliary lithiasis. Interferon Interferon alpha is effective in controlling both diarrhea and flushing, although it is inferior to the somatostatin analogs. The dose is 3-9 mU subcuteneously three to seven times per week. Interferon alpha therapy is often limited by its side effects: fever, anemia, thrombocytopenia, neutropenia, fatigue, depression, and flu-like symptoms. Other Drugs & Symptom-Specific Treatments Diarrhea: Cyproheptadine is an alternative treatment for carcinoid-associated diarrhea. 60% of patients report improvement within one week. The dosage is 4 mg TID given orally as a tablet; it can be titrated up to 0.5 mg/kg per day. Side effects include sedation, dry mouth, dizziness, mild blurring of vision, nausea, and vomiting. Loperamide and opioids are non-specific anti-diarrheal agents that can be used for mild symptoms. Wheezing: bronchodilators. Heart failure: diuretics;, ricuspid valve replacement. Non-Drug Treatments Patients should be counseled to identify and eliminate stressors that reproducibly cause symptoms—this may include specific stressful situations, foods, or alcohol. Other Other treatments for refractory symptoms include systemic chemotherapy, hepatic artery embolization, hepatic chemoembolization, or debulking surgery of hepatic metastases. References Kulke, MH, Mayer, RJ. Medical progress: carcinoid tumors. N Engl J Med. 1999; 340:858-68. di Bartololmeo M, Bajetta E, Buzzoni R, et al. Clinical efficacy of octreotide in the treatment of metastatic neuroendocrine tumors. A study by the Italian Trials in Medical Oncology Group. Cancer. 1996; 77:402-8. Ruszniewski P, Ducreux M, Chayvialle J, et al. Treatment of carcinoid syndrome with the longacting somatostatin analogue lanreotide: a prospective study in 39 patients. Gut. 1996; 39:279-83. Garland J, Buscombe JR, Bouvier C, et al. Sandostatin LAR (long-acting octreotide acetate) for malignant carcinoid syndrome: a 3-year experience. Aliment Pharmacol Ther. 2003; 17:437-44. Moertel CG, Kvols LK, Rubin J. A study of cyproheptadine in the treatment of metastatic carcinoid tumor and the malignant carcinoid syndrome. Cancer. 1991; 67:33-6. Oberg K, Funa K, Alm G. Effects of leukocyte interferon on clinical symptoms and hormone levels in patients with mid-gut carcinoid tumors and carcinoid syndrome. N Engl J Med. 1983; 309:129-33. Sitaraman SV, Goldfinger SE. Treatment of carcinoid tumors and the carcinoid syndrome. In: Basow DS, ed. UpToDate. Waltham, MA; UpToDate; 2004. ACGME Competencies: Medical Knowledge , Patient Care Keyword(s): Non-Pain Symptoms and Syndromes 
#138 Grief in Children and Developmental Concepts of Death Author(s): Adam Himebauch, Robert Arnold MD, and Carol May Background An understanding of age-appropriate grief reactions and conceptions of death are important when assessing a child’s response to terminal illness and a loved one’s death. This Fast Fact reviews key developmental concepts and describes strategies for addressing children’s grief. Children grieve differently than adults. They often grieve in spurts and can re-grieve at new developmental stages as their understanding of death and perceptions of the world change. Childhood grief may be expressed as behavioral changes and/or emotional expression. The two most important predictive factors of a child’s successful outcome after suffering a loss are the availability of one significant adult and the provision of a safe physical and emotional environment. 0-2 years (Infant) Children at this age have no cognitive understanding of death. However, grief reactions are possible and separation anxiety is a concern. Behavioral and developmental regression can occur as children have difficulty identifying and dealing with their loss; they may react in concert with the distress experienced by their caregiver. There is a need to maintain routines and to avoid separation from significant others. 2-6 years (Preschool) Preschool age children see death as temporary and reversible. They interpret their world in a concrete and literal manner and may ask questions reflecting this perspective. They may believe that death can be caused by thoughts and provide magical explanations, often blaming themselves for the death. Providing simple and straightforward explanations, avoiding euphemisms, correcting misperceptions, and reminding them that the loved one will not return are important strategies. 6-8 years (School Age) Children understand that death is final and irreversible but do not believe that it is universal or could happen to them. Death is often personalized and/or personified. Expressions of anger towards the deceased or towards those perceived to have been unable to save the deceased can occur. Anxiety, depressive symptoms, and somatic complaints may be present. The child often has fears about death and concerns about their other loved ones’ safety. In addition to giving clear, realistic information, offer to include the child in funeral ceremonies. Notifying the school will help teachers understand the child’s reaction and provide additional adult support. 8-12 years (Pre-adolescent) Children at this age have an adult understanding of death – that it is final, irreversible, and universal. They are able to understand the biological aspects of death as well as cause-and-effect relationships. They tend to intellectualize death as many have not yet learned to identify and deal with feelings. They may develop a morbid curiosity and are often interested in the physical details of the dying process as well as the religious and cultural traditions surrounding death. The ability to identify causal relationships can lead to feelings of guilt; such feelings should be explored and addressed. To facilitate identification with emotions, it may prove useful to talk about your own emotions surrounding death and to offer opportunities for the child to discuss death. The child should also be allowed to participate, as much as they feel comfortable, in seeing the dying patient and participating in activities surrounding the death. 12-18 years (Adolescent) Adolescents also have an adult understanding of death. They are developing the ability to think abstractly and are often curious of the existential implications of death. They often reject adult rituals and support and feel that no one understands them. They may engage in high-risk activities in order to more fully challenge their own mortality. They often have strong emotional reactions and may have difficulty identifying and expressing feelings. It is important that adults support independence and access to peers, but to also provide emotional support when needed. Summary The generalizations and strategies provided above only serve as a framework when dealing with the death of a loved one. When in doubt, seek help from pediatricians, child-life specialists, mental health professionals, and others specializing in bereavement. References Gudas LS, Koocher GP. Grief and Bereavement. In: Behrman RE, Kliegman RM, Jenson HB, eds. Nelson Textbook of Pediatrics. 17th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Saunders; 2004. Himelstein BP, Hilden JM, Boldt AM, Weissman D. Pediatric palliative care. N Engl J Med. 2004; 350:1752-1762. Trozzi M, Dixon S. Stressful Events: Separation, Loss, Violence, and Death. In: Dixon SD, Stein MT, eds. Encounters with Children: Pediatric Behavior & Development. 3rd ed. St Louis, MO: Mosby; 2000. Fine P, ed. Processes to Optimize Care During the Last Phase of Life. Scottsdale, AZ: Vista Care Hospice, Inc.; 1998. ACGME Competencies: Medical Knowledge , Patient Care Keyword(s): Psychosocial and Spiritual Experience: Patients, Families, and Clinicians 
#139 Hospice Referral: Moving from Hospital to Home Author(s): Tara C Friedman MD Background The transition from hospital to home for the patient about to be enrolled in home hospice care is complex. Miscommunication between hospital staff and hospice care providers regarding goals of care and medications occurs commonly and only heightens existing stress and fear among patients and their caregivers. This Fast Fact reviews key steps in the transition from the acute care hospital setting to home hospice care. Clarify goals Fast Fact #38 reviews key do’s and don’ts of the initial hospice discussion with patients and families. Prior to discharge additional steps to clarify the goals of care include: Confirm in the records that you believe the patient meets hospice eligibility requirements ( see Fast Fact #82 ): “In my medical judgement, the patient has a prognosis of less than 6 months if the disease follows its usual course.” Review all medications and interventions (e.g. tube feedings, oral antibiotics). Any medications and interventions that do not help the patient and family meet their goals of care or enhance quality/comfort should be discussed with patients/families, and a recommendation made to discontinue them. Project ahead to the coming days to weeks: what symptoms/problems do you anticipate will likely occur (e.g. dyspnea in a lung cancer patient)? Ask yourself if the current medications/interventions will likely meet these needs or do additional medications/ interventions need to be made available in the home? Contact the Hospice Agency Whoever makes the initial contact with a hospice agency (physician, discharge planner, palliative care nurse, etc.) should have the following information in hand: Patient’s address – confirm the patient lives within the hospice’s catchment area. Birth date and medical insurance information. Terminal diagnosis (e.g. dementia, cancer). Name of physician who will be physician of record for hospice care. Overall goals of care and special issues (e.g. family needs special bereavement support for children who live in the home or patient has two days of palliative radiation left). Medical equipment needs (e.g. hospital bed, oxygen). Anticipated discharge date/time. Coordinated Discharge Whenever possible, have someone from the hospice program meet the patient and their caregiver in the hospital prior to discharge to review hospice eligibility and covered services. If not feasible, arrange for the initial hospice referral visit to occur when the patient arrives home, or within 24 hours of hospital discharge at the outside. Include the hospice staff in the discharge plan. Review symptoms and confirm treatments for the terminal illness with hospice staff. Review symptoms and confirm treatments for diseases unrelated to the terminal illness. Plan to have durable medical equipment and medications available when the patient arrives at home; coordinate this with your hospice agency provider. Most hospice agencies need at least 24 hours to coordinate the delivery of these items to the home. With careful planning, the stress of transitioning to home hospice care will be minimized, allowing your patients, their families and yourself the opportunity to focus on important issues near the end of life. References Turner R, Rosielle D. Medicare Hospice Benefit – Part I: Eligibility and Treatment Plan, 2nd Edition. Fast Facts and Concepts. November 2007; 82. Available at: http://www.eperc.mcw.edu/fastfact/ff_082.htm. von Gunten CF. Discussing Hospice, 2nd Edition. Fast Facts and Concepts. July 2005; 38. Available at: http://www.eperc.mcw.edu/fastfact/ff_038.htm. ACGME Competencies: Patient Care, Systems-Based Practice Keyword(s): Communication, Ethics, Law, Policy Health Systems 
#140 Medicare Hospice Benefit: Levels of Hospice Care Author(s) : Tara C Friedman MD Background In the United States, modern hospice care is guided by the Medicare Hospice Benefit (MHB), which pays for 80% of all hospice care ( see Fast Facts #82 , 87 , 90 ). Because more than 95% of hospice care is in the form of routine home care, clinicians may not be aware that the MHB specifies four different levels of hospice services to meet the diverse needs of dying patients and their family. Routine Home Care: The most common type of hospice services in the United States. Hospice interdisciplinary team provides core services ( see Fast Fact #82 ) in the patient’s home. The patient’s home may be a private home, an assisted living facility, a boarding home, or a long-term care facility – wherever the patient lives. Respite Care: Respite care is short-term inpatient care to relieve the family/primary caregiver. Caregivers often schedule respite in order to travel or tend to their own healthcare needs. Respite is limited to 5 consecutive days. The hospice agency may provide respite in a variety of contracted settings (e.g. inpatient facility, local nursing home, etc.). General Inpatient Hospice Care (GIHC): The MHB provides for care to be provided in an acute care hospital or other setting where intensive nursing and other support is available outside of the home. Criteria for this level of care include: Uncontrolled distressing physical symptoms (e.g. uncontrolled pain, intractable nausea, respiratory distress, severe wounds, etc.). Psychosocial problems (e.g. unsafe home environment or imminent death where family can no longer cope at home). GIHC may be provided in a variety of settings Dedicated inpatient hospice facilities, where the patient is cared for by dedicated hospice staff. Contract beds, where the facility (hospital/nursing home) staff provides routine care, with supplemental services provided by hospice personnel. Continuous Home Care: For hospice patients who qualify for GIHC, but desire to remain in their own home, continuous care (CC) intends to support the patient and their caregiver through brief periods of crisis. CC provides care for 8-24 hours a day. Home health aide and homemaker services or both may be used to cover the care needs. Care must be primarily provided (more than 50%) by an LPN or RN. Under the MHB patients may be admitted into a hospice program at any level of care as determined by their individual needs and the patient may transfer between the levels of care as needed. For patients whose hospice care is covered by a pay source other than Medicare, there may be limitations or specifications for the different levels of care. References NHPCO Facts & Figures, 2004. Alexandria, VA: National Hospice and Palliative Care Organization; 2004. Most current version is available at: http://www.nhpco.org/files/public/Statistics_Research/NHPCO_facts-and-figures_2008.htm. Accessed April 16, 2009. Kinzbrunner BM, et al. 20 Common Problems in End-of-Life Care. New York, NY: Mc-Graw Hill; 2002. Code of Federal Regulations, Title 42 – Public Health. Chapter IV – Health Care Financing Administration, Department of Health and Human Services. Subchapter B – Medicare Program, Part 418 – Hospice Care. ACGME Competencies: Systems-Based Practice Keyword(s): Ethics, Law, Policy Health Systems 
#141 Prognosis in End-Stage COPD Author(s): Julie Wilson Childers MD, Robert Arnold MD, and J Randall Curtis MD Background Prognostic variables in COPD patients are not well described, thus decision making regarding when to move away from aggressive life-sustaining treatments is challenging. This Fast Fact will review prognostication in patients with advanced COPD. Ambulatory COPD Patients The forced expiratory volume in one second (FEV1) has traditionally been used to assess COPD severity. A FEV1 of less than 35% of the predicted value represents severe disease; 25% of these patients will die within two years and 55% by four years. A number of other studies have shown that age, low body mass index (BMI), and low PaO2 were independent predictors that correlated to reduced survival time. The BODE scale, consisting of BMI, exercise capacity, and subjective estimates of dyspnea, has been shown to help predict survival over 1-3 years (Celli 2004): Variable Points on BODE Index 0 1 2 3 FEV1 (% predicted) ≥65 50-64 36-49 ≤35 Distance walked in 6 min (meters) >350 250-349 150-249 ≤149 MMRC dyspnea scale* 0-1 2 3 4 Body-mass index (BMI) >21 ≤21 BODE Index Score One year mortality Two year mortality 52 month mortality 0-2 2% 6% 19% 3-4 2% 8% 32% 4-6 2% 14% 40% 7-10 5% 31% 80% Note: these variables do not appear to help predict prognosis within six months of death. Hospitalized COPD Patients Mortality statistics vary for patients admitted with COPD exacerbations depending on age, functional status, co-morbidities, and physiological variables such as hypoxia and hypercarbia. Roughly 10% of patients admitted with a PaCO2 >50 mmHg will die during the index hospitalization, 33% will die within six months, and 43% die within one-year (Connors 1996). Patients with less severe COPD have lower in-hospital mortality rates (Patil 2003). COPD patients who require mechanical ventilation have an-hospital mortality of ~25% (Seneff 1995, Nevins 2001). Poor prognostic factors include: co-morbid illnesses, severity of illness (APACHE II score), low serum albumin, and/or low hemoglobin. Previous mechanical ventilation, failed extubation, or intubation for greater than 72 hours all increase mortality (Nevins 2001). In one study, patients ventilated more than 48 hours had a 50% one year survival; functional status and severity of illness were associated with short term mortality while age and co-morbidities were associated with one year mortality (Celli 2004). National Hospice and Palliative Care Organization Criteria NHPCO guidelines for hospice admission in COPD include factors such as cor pulmonale and pO2 <55 mmHg while on oxygen, albumin < 2.5 gm/dl, weight loss of > 10%, progression of disease, and poor functional status. However, a study showed when using these factors, 50% of the patients were still alive at six months, implying that the NHPCO criteria have a limited role in predicting six month mortality and thus should be used with caution in determining hospice eligibility under the Medicare Hospice Benefit (Fox 1999). Summary COPD is a heterogeneous disease without a simple prognostic trajectory. For ambulatory patients, age, degree of dyspnea, weight loss (BMI), functional status and FEV1 are relevant prognostic factors for predicting 1-3 year survival. For hospitalized patients, the same factors are relevant. In addition, the need for prolonged or recurrent mechanical ventilation is predictive of shorter prognosis. References Celli BR, Cote CG, Marin JM, et al. The body-mass index, airflow obstruction, dyspnea, and exercise capacity index in chronic obstructive pulmonary disease. N Eng J Med. 2004; 350(10):1005-12. Connors AF Jr, Dawson NV, Thomas C, et al. Outcomes following acute exacerbation of severe chronic obstructive lung disease. The SUPPORT investigators (Study to Understand Prognoses and Preferences for Outcomes and Risks of Treatments). Am J Respir Crit Care Med. 1996; 154:959-967. Fox E, Landrum-McNiff K, Zhong Z, Dawson NV, Wu AW, Lynn J. Evaluation of prognostic criteria for determining hospice eligibility in patients with advanced lung, heart, or liver disease. JAMA. 1999; 282(17):1638-45. Nevins ML, Epstein SK. Predictors of outcome for patients with COPD requiring invasive mechanical ventilation. Chest. 2001; 119:1840-9. Plant PK, Owen JL, Elliott MW. Early use of non-invasive ventilation for acute exacerbations of chronic obstructive pulmonary disease on general respiratory wards: a multicentre randomised controlled trial. Lancet. 2000; 355:1931-35. Seneff MG, Wagner DP, Wagner RP, et al. Hospital and 1-year survival of patients admitted to intensive care units with acute exacerbation of chronic obstructive pulmonary disease. JAMA. 1995; 274:1852-57. ACGME Competencies: Medical Knowledge, Patient Care, Systems-Based Practice Keyword(s): Prognosis 
#142 Opioid-Induced Hyperalgesia Author(s): Winifred G Teuteberg MD Background Opioid-induced hyperalgesia is a clinical phenomenon, characterized by increasing in pain in patients who are receiving increasing doses of opioids. This Fast Fact reviews the clinical findings and treatment options. See also Fast Fact #215 on opioid poorly-responsive pain. Clinical features of opioid hyperalgesia: History Increasing sensitivity to pain stimuli (hyperalgesia). Worsening pain despite increasing doses of opioids. Pain that becomes more diffuse, extending beyond the distribution of pre-existing pain. Can occur at any dose of opioid, but more commonly with high parenteral doses of morphine or hydromorphone and/or in the setting of renal failure. Physical Examination Pain elicited from ordinarily non-painful stimuli, such as stroking skin with cotton (allodynia) Presence of other opioid hyperexcitability effects: myoclonus, delirium or seizures ( see Fast Facts #57 , 58 ). Proposed mechanisms: Toxic effect of opioid metabolites (e.g. morphine-3-glucuronide or hydromorphone-3-glucronide). Central sensitization as a result of opioid-related activation of N-methyl-D-asparate (NMDA) receptors in the central nervous system. Increase in spinal dynorphin activity. Enhanced descending facilitation from the rostral ventromedial medulla. Activation of intracellular protein kinase C. Therapies: Reduce or discontinue the current opioid. Change opioid to one with less risk of neurotoxic effects: fentanyl or methadone ( see Fast Fact #75 ). Add an infusion of a non-opioid NMDA receptor antagonist such as ketamine ( see Fast Fact #132 ). Add a non-opioid adjuvant such as acetaminophen or an NSAID. Initiate epidural, intrathecal, regional or local anesthesia and taper/discontinue systemic opioids. Increase hydration if clinically appropriate. Conclusion Opioids can lead to a paradoxical increase in pain. Opioid-induced hyperalgesia should be considered in any patient with increasing pain that is not responding to increasing opioids. Referral to pain/palliative care professionals is appropriate to help develop a management strategy. References Mao J. Opioid-induced abnormal pain sensitivity: implications in clinical opioid therapy. Pain. 2000; 100:213-217. Portenoy RK, Forbes K, Lussier D, Hanks G. Difficult pain problems: an integrated approach. In: Doyle D, Hanks G, Cherny N, Calman K, eds. Oxford Textbook of Palliative Medicine. 3rd ed. New York, NY: Oxford University Press; 2004: p439. Laird D, Lovel T. Paradoxical pain (letter). Lancet. 1993; 341:241. Walker SM, Cousins MJ. Reduction in hyperalgesia and intrathecal morphine requirements by low-dose ketamine infusion (letter). J Pain Symptom Manage. 1997; 14:129-133. Carroll IR, et al. Management of perioperative pain in patients chronically consuming opioids. Reg Anesth Pain Med. 2004; 29:576-591. ACGME Competencies: Medical Knowledge, Patient Care Keyword(s): Pain – Opioidss 
#143 Prognostication in Heart Failure Author(s): Gary M Reisfield MD and George R Wilson MD Background This Fast Fact reviews prognostication data in Heart Failure (HF). Although the Framingham Heart Study (1990-1999) showed a 5-year mortality rate of 50% for newly identified cases, providing accurate prognostic data for 6-12 month mortality in HF has been nearly impossible. Reasons cited include: 1) an unpredictable disease trajectory with high incidence (25-50%) of sudden death; 2) disparities in the application of evidence-based treatment guidelines; 3) inter-observer differences in New York Heart Association (NYHA) classification; and 4) heterogeneous study populations in the HF literature. NYHA Classification The NYHA classification remains the major gauge of disease severity. Based on data from SUPPORT, Framingham, IMPROVEMENT, and other studies, 1-year mortality estimates are as follows: Class II (mild symptoms): 5-10%. Class III (moderate symptoms): 10-15%. Class IV (severe symptoms): 30-40%. General Predictors of Shorter Prognosis The following indicators have been independently associated with a limited prognosis in HF: Recent cardiac hospitalization (triples 1-year mortality). Elevated BUN (defined by upper limit of normal) and/or creatinine ≥1.4 mg/dl (120 μmol/l). Systolic blood pressure <100 mm Hg and/or pulse >100 bpm (each doubles 1-year mortality). Decreased left ventricular ejection fraction (linearly correlated with survival at LVEF ≤ 45%). Ventricular dysrhythmias, treatment resistant. Anemia (each 1 g/dl reduction in hemoglobin is associated with a 16% increase in mortality). Hyponatremia (serum sodium ≤135-137 mEq/l). Cachexia. Reduced functional capacity. Co-morbidities: diabetes, depression, COPD, cirrhosis, cerebrovascular disease, cancer, and HIV-associated cardiomyopathy. Hospice Eligibility Guidelines The National Hospice and Palliative Care Organization’s 1996 guidelines for heart disease admission criteria include: a) symptoms of recurrent HF at rest (NYHA class IV) and b) optimal treatment with ACE inhibitors, diuretics, and vasodilators ( contemporary optimal treatment now includes β-blockers, aldosterone antagonists, and device therapies ). The NHPCO guide indicates that an ejection fraction < 20% is “helpful supplemental objective evidence,” but not required. The NHPCO guidelines also assert that each of the following further decreases survival: treatment resistant ventricular or supraventricular arrhythmias, history of cardiac arrest in any setting, history of unexplained syncope, cardiogenic brain embolism, and concomitant HIV disease. Prognostic Models Since publication of the NHPCO’s guidelines, several models have been developed for predicting short- and/or long-term mortality among HF patients. Two recent models purport to predict mortality among patients hospitalized with acutely decompensated HF . Fonarow et al (2005), using a model based on admission BUN (≥ 43 mg/dl), creatinine (≥ 2.75 mg/dl), and systolic BP ( < 115 mmHg), identified in-hospital mortality rates ranging from about 2% (0/3 risk factors) to 20% (3/3 risk factors). Lee et al (2003), using a model based on admission physiologic variables and co-morbidities (almost all from above list of indicators) identified 30-day mortality and 1-year mortality rates ranging from <1% and <10%, respectively, for the lowest risk patients to >50% and >75%, respectively, for the highest risk patients. While both models are applicable to bedside use, neither has been applied prospectively or in independent patient samples, nor do they address HF treatments as predictive variables. More recently, Levy et al (2006) developed a 24-variable risk model using the PRAISE1 (n=1125) database and validated it on preexisting ELITE2, ValHeFT, UW, RENAISSANCE, and IN-CHF (n=9942) databases. The model purports to accurately estimate mean 1-, 2-, and 3-year survival and, importantly, dynamically incorporates clinical and laboratory variables, HF medications, and device therapies. It awaits independent, prospective evaluation in unselected HF patients. A web-based interactive calculator can be accessed at http://www.seattleheartfailuremodel.org. Bottom Line Meticulous application of medication and device therapies can and will continue to change HF prognosis. HF follows an unpredictable disease trajectory, one which is highly mutable by application of evidence-based therapies, yet still marked by a high incidence of sudden death. The 1996 NHPCO criteria are not accurate predictors of 6-month mortality. Several models have recently been developed to aid in determining short- and long-term mortality in HF patients. These models await independent, prospective validation in unselected ambulatory HF patients and will need periodic updating to control for continually evolving standards of HF care. At present, accurate prognostication remains problematic. References Anand I, McMurray JJV, Whitmore J. Anemia and its relationship to clinical outcome in heart failure. Circulation. 2004; 110:149-154. Anker SD, Ponikowski P, Varney S, et al. Wasting as an independent risk factor for mortality in chronic heart failure. Lancet. 1997; 349:1050-1053. Curtis JP, Sokol SI, Wang Y, et al. The association of left ventricular ejection fraction, mortality, and cause of death in stable outpatients with heart failure. J Am Coll Cardiol. 2003; 42(4):736-742. Fonarow GC, Adams KF, Abraham WT, et al. Risk stratification for in-hospital mortality in acutely decompensated heart failure. JAMA. 2005;2 93(5):572-580. Horwich TB, Fonarow GC, Hamilton MA, et al. Anemia is associated with worse symptoms, greater impairment in functional capacity and a significant increase in mortality in patients with advanced heart failure. J Am Coll Cardiol. 2002; 39(11):1780-1786. Kearney MT, Fox KAA, Lee AJ. Predicting death due to progressive heart failure in patients with mild-to-moderate chronic heart failure. J Am Coll Cardiol. 2002; 40(10):1801-1808. Lee DS, Austin PC, Rouleau JL, et al. Predicting mortality among patients hospitalized for heart failure. JAMA. 2003; 290(19):2581-2587. Levenson JW, McCarthy EP, Lynn J, et al. The last six months of life for patients with congestive heart failure. J Am Geriatr Soc. 2000; 48(Suppl 5):S101-S109. Levy D, Kenchaiah S, Larson MG, et al. Long-term trends in the incidence of and survival with heart failure. NEJM. 2002; 347(18):1397-1402. Levy WC, Mozaffarian D, Linker DT, et al. The Seattle Heart Failure Model. Prediction of Survival in Heart Failure. Circulation. 2006; 113:1424-1433. Muntwyler J, Abetel G, Gruner C, et al. One-year mortality among unselected outpatients with heart failure. Eur Heart J. 2002; 23:1861-1866. Stuart B, et al. Medical Guidelines for determining prognosis in selected non-cancer diseases. 2nd Edition. Alexandria, VA: National Hospice Organization; 1996. Zannad F, Briancon S, Julliere Y. Incidence, clinical and etiologic features, and outcomes of advanced chronic heart failure: the EPICAL study. J Am Coll Cardiol. 1999; 33(3):734-742. ACGME Competencies: Medical Knowledge, Patient Care Keyword(s): Prognosis 
#144 Palliative Care Issues in Heart Failure Author(s): Gary M Reisfield MD and George R Wilson MD Background The physical and psychological symptom burden in the dying heart failure (HF) patient is similar to that in the dying cancer patient. Symptom prevalence data in HF includes: pain (78%), dyspnea (61%), depression (59%), insomnia (45%), anorexia, (43%), anxiety (30%), constipation (37%), nausea/vomiting (32%), fatigue, difficulty ambulating, and edema. This Fast Fact reviews domains of medical management common to most end-stage HF patients. General Symptom Management Pain . Common causes include: peripheral edema, arthritis, diabetic neuropathy, and post-herpetic neuralgia. NSAIDs are generally contraindicated because they antagonize the effects of diuretics and ACE inhibitors, promoting fluid retention while decreasing glomerular filtration and impairing renal function. Opioids are the agents of choice for nociceptive and neuropathic pain because of efficacy, rapidity of onset and potential to relieve dyspnea. See Fast Facts #18 , 28 , 53 , 54 , and 72. Dyspnea . Reassess/optimize HF medications and assess for reversible causes, e.g. pleural/pericardial effusions, dysrhythmias, COPD exacerbation. See Fast Fact #27 . Depression. Short-term psychotherapy can be helpful for mild-moderate depression, but patient participation and logistical issues can be problematic. Selective serotonin reuptake inhibitors (SSRIs) are the antidepressants of choice because they preserve ejection fraction, lack hypotensive/dysrhythmogenic effects, and have few drug interactions. Sertraline in particular may be the agent of choice in HF patients. Psychostimulants ( see Fast Fact #61 ) may accelerate the treatment response to SSRIs. Note: as there exists no data on the safety of psychostimulants in HF, therapy should be initiated with caution. Heart Failure Pharmacotherapy Optimal drug use can improve symptoms and should be continued until the burden of administration outweighs benefits. Diuretic therapy can be crucial, but diuretic resistance is common. The following strategy can help overcome diuretic resistance: Optimize dose of oral loop diuretic (e.g. furosemide). Doses of up to 4000 mg/day have been found to be safe and effective. Change to intravenous or subcutaneous routes. IVboluses can produce symptom relief within minutes. Continuous infusions (3-200 mg/hr; 10-20 mg/hr in most patients) provide increased efficacy. Add a PRN oral thiazide diuretic (e.g. hydrochlorothiazide 25-100 mg/day or metolazone 5-20 mg/day. This can reestablish diuresis in a loop diuretic-resistant patient. Note: high dose and combination diuretics can result in electrolyte imbalances; consider electrolyte monitoring if death is not imminent. Inotropes Intravenous inotrope therapy (dobutamine, milrinone, dopamine) has a substantial record of use but a paucity of data in the home setting. Data suggest these agents may improve symptoms, but with an increased risk of dysrhythmic death. In hospitalized inotrope-dependent HF patients, discharge on inotropes may provide the opportunity for death to occur at home if desired by patient/family. Device therapies Decisions regarding previously implanted device therapies should be made in the context of goals of care. See Fast Facts #111 , 112 for a discussion of implantable devices and issues surrounding deactivation; Fast Fact #205 discusses ventricular assist devices. Prognostic Uncertainty Accurate prognostication is virtually impossible in HF ( see Fast Fact #143 ). While this uncertainty is frustrating for physicians, it provides a basis for initiating end-of-life discussions. Clinicians can best help their patients by: Initiating advance care planning discussions before a crisis or following HF hospitalization (which triples one-year mortality). Educating patients and families about the unpredictable, but usually terminal nature of HF, and the ever present danger of sudden cardiac death (even when feeling well). Ascertaining specific goals of care (e.g. quality of life vs. length of life, living/dying at home vs. hospital) and assessing options for achieving these goals (e.g. initiating/handling device therapies including when and how to deactivate, hospice vs. serial hospital/critical care unit admissions, resuscitation preferences. Patient Resources A free advance care planning packet for HF patients is available through the Heart Failure Society of America website at: http://www.hfsa.org/pdf/module9.htm. References Albert NM, Davis M, Young J. Improving the care of patients dying of heart failure. Cleve Clin J Med. 2002; 69(4):321-328. Alvarez W, Pickworth KK. Safety of antidepressant drugs in the patient with cardiac disease: a review of the literature. Pharmacotherapy. 2003; 23(6):754-771. Berger JT. The ethics of deactivating implanted cardioverter defibrillators. An Intern Med. 2005; 142(8):631-634. DeBruyne LKM. Mechanisms and management of diuretic resistance in congestive heart failure. Postgrad Med J. 2003; 79:268-271. Ward C. The need for palliative care in the management of heart failure. Heart. 2002; 87:294-298. Braun TC, Hagen NA, Hatfield RE. Cardiac pacemakers and implantable defibrillators in terminal care. J Pain Symptom Manage. 1999; 18(2):126-131. ACGME Competencies: Medical Knowledge, Patient Care Keyword(s): Non-Pain Symptoms and Syndromes 
#145 Panic Disorder at the End-of-Life Author(s): VJ Periyakoil MD Background Anxiety and fear occur commonly in the dying patient. However, disabling anxiety and/or panic is not a normal aspect of the dying process. Separating “normal” death-related anxiety from pathological panic is an important palliative care skill. Definitions A panic attack is defined in the DSM-IV as “a discrete period of intense fear or discomfort, in which four (or more) of the following symptoms develop abruptly and reach a peak within 10 minutes: palpitations, pounding heart or accelerated heart rate, sweating, trembling or shaking, sensations of shortness of breath or smothering, feeling of choking, chest pain or discomfort, nausea or abdominal distress, feeling dizzy, unsteady, lightheaded or faint, derealization or depersonalization, fear of losing control or going crazy, fear of dying. Derealization describes a sensation of feeling estranged or detached from one’s environment. Depersonalization is an altered and unreal perception of self, one’s feelings and/or situation. Described by one patient as “feeling like you are on the outside looking in”. Diagnosis A combination of physical symptoms (feeling dizzy, weak, nauseous, unsteady, lightheaded, breathless) and affective symptoms (fear of loss of control) are used to diagnose a panic disorder. Terminally ill patients may often have many of the physical symptoms listed above as a part of their illness process. Thus the presence of derealization, depersonalization and fear of loss of control are more useful in making the diagnosis of panic disorder in the terminally ill. A contributing feature to the diagnosis of panic disorder is if a patient develops recurrent symptoms, worries about future ‘attacks’ and alters her/his behavior in anticipation of such attacks. Terminally ill patients with chronic dyspnea may often worry about “suffocating to death.” Management Educate patients about the diagnosis and reassure them that their symptoms can be greatly palliated with appropriate treatment. Optimize medical management of symptoms like pain, non-pain symptoms (especially dyspnea) and depression. Ideal therapy is a combination of medical therapy with psychological counseling. Add complementary/alternative treatments: music therapy, massage therapy, guided imagery, biofeedback. Medical management is influenced by anticipated lifespan and severity of panic symptoms. Selective serotonin reuptake inhibitor (SSRI) monotherapy or SSRI therapy augmented with low dose benzodiazepines for a period of 3 to 4 weeks followed by SSRI monotherapy (taper off benzodiazepines after 3 weeks) is indicated in patients with an anticipated lifespan of at least several weeks. SSRIs can exacerbate anxiety in some patients during the first few days of therapy. Consider adding benzodiazepines as needed for the first few weeks in such cases. Benzodiazepine monotherapy should be considered in patients with anticipated lifespan of days to weeks. Consider low dose long acting benzodiazepine therapy on schedule (e.g. diazepam 1 mg every 12 hours) with short acting benzodiazepines (e.g. lorazepam 0.5 mg every 4 to 6 hours as needed) for acute breakthrough symptoms. Many terminally ill patients need maintenance therapy for the rest of their life span, as relapse rates are high on treatment discontinuation. In cases where treatment termination is attempted, it is recommended that the medications be tapered gradually over a several week period to allow early detection of a relapse. Abrupt termination of benzodiazepine therapy often may result in intense rebound anxiety. This may happen when the patient is actively dying and unable to take oral medications. In such cases, use alternate routes of drug administration (diazepam gel, diazepam rectal suppository or diazepam or midazolam infusions). References Periyakoil VS, Skultety K, Sheikh J. Panic, anxiety, and chronic dyspnea J Pallit Med. 2005; 8:453-459 DSM-IV: Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders. 4th ed. Washington, DC: American Psychiatric Association; 1994. Anderson A, ed. The ASAP Dictionary of Anxiety and Panic Disorders. Available at: http://anxiety-panic.com/dictionary/en-main.htm. ACGME Competencies: Medical Knowledge, Patient Care Keyword(s): Non-Pain Symptoms and Syndromes 
#146 Screening for Depression in Palliative Care Author(s): Robert Arnold MD Background Depression is a significant symptom for approximately 1 in 4 palliative care patients and is especially common in patients with metastatic cancer ( see Fast Fact #21 ). Up to 80% of the psychological symptoms that occur in cancer patients go unrecognized and untreated. One reason for this is the difficulty in diagnosing depression in palliative care patients ( see Fast Fact #7 ). In the primary care literature a number of brief screening instruments such as PRIME-MD are used to identify depression. However, the symptoms associated with depression in primary care (weight loss, loss of energy, fatigue, insomnia) also occur in patients without depression who have a life-threatening disease. Thus, there has been interest in developing a brief scale that can accurately identify depression in the palliative care population. This Fast Fact reviews that literature on depression screening tools. Single question screening: A study of palliative care inpatients found that a single question, “Are you feeling down, depressed or hopeless most of the time over the last 2 weeks?” correctly identified patients with 100 percent sensitivity and specificity and a positive predictive value of 1 (Chochinov 1997). Adding a second question about anhedonia (the absence of pleasure from the performance of acts that would normally be pleasurable), “Have you found that little brings you pleasure or joy over the last two weeks?” , reduced the specificity and positive predictive value. Unfortunately, follow-up studies using a single question regarding mood in other palliative care populations have shown a sensitivity of roughly 55 percent and a specificity of 75 percent. A four-item algorithm asks questions about energy level, anhedonism, depressed mood, and psychomotor retardation/agitation. In a study of hospice patients in Australia this tool had a sensitivity between 62 and 72%, specificity of 75 to 89% and positive predictive value of between 68 and 89% (Robinson 2005). The four question Brief Case Find for Depression asks questions about sleep, depressed mood, life satisfaction, and ability to overcome difficulties. In a study of oncology and palliative care patients this tool had fair agreement with longer depression screening instruments (Jefford 2004). Other studies have examined 10-20 question depression instruments that have been validated in other patient populations. The Edinburgh Postnatal Depression Scale (Lloyd-Williams 2000), a self-assessment scale consisting of ten items each rated on a 4 point scale, had a sensitivity of 70% and specificity of 80% in patients with metastatic cancer receiving palliative care. The Hospital Anxiety and Depression Scale (Lloyd-Williams 2003) is a 14 item scale with separate sub-scales for anxiety and depression. In a group of patients with metastatic cancer, summing the two subscales gave a sensitivity of 77%, specificity was 89% and a positive predicted value of 0.48. Two more recent articles reported lower sensitivity and specificity in patients with advanced metastatic disease. Summary and Recommendations Clinicians should have a high clinical suspicion for depression—especially in patients who exhibit feelings of hopelessness, worthlessness, guilt, anhedonia, sustained periods of feeling sad, and/or those with suicidal ideation and/or suicidal plans. The literature does not suggest that any of the above scales are clearly superior for helping to diagnose depression in a population of palliative care patients. Depression screening scales may be helpful in individual cases to provide the clinician with additional data in formulating a diagnosis; if used, it is suggested that clinicians be familiar with the sensitivity/specificity data for one scale and consistently use that scale so as to gain clinical familiarity. Psychiatric consultation is indicated in cases of diagnostic uncertainty and/or when patients present with profound depression and/or are overtly suicidal. Definitions (Further resources available at: http://www.musc.edu/dc/icrebm/diagnostictests.html.) Sensitivity: The fraction of those with the disease correctly identified as positive by the test. Specificity: The fraction of those without the disease correctly identified as negative by the test. Positive predictive value: The fraction of people with positive tests who actually have the condition. References Chochinov HM, Wilson K, Enns G, et al. 'Are you depressed?' Screening for depression in the terminally ill. Am J Psychiatry. 1997; 154(5):674-676. Lloyd-Williams M, Spiller J, Ward J. Which depression screening tools should be used in palliative care? Pall Med. 2003; 17:40-43. Lloyd-Williams M, Friedman T, Rudd N. Criterion validation of the Edinburgh Postnatal depression scale as a screening tool for depression in patients with advanced metastatic cancer. J Pain Symp Man. 2000; 20:259-65. Jefford M, Mileshkin L, Richard K, Thomson J et al. Rapid screening for depression- validation of the Brief Case-Finding for Depression (BCD) in medical oncology and palliative care patients. Br J Cancer. 2004; 91:900-6. Robinson JA, Crawford GB. Identifying palliative care patients with symptoms of depression: an algorithm. Pall Med. 2005; 19:278-87. ACGME Competencies: Medical Knowledge, Patient Care Keyword(s): Non-Pain Symptoms and Syndromes, Communication 
#147 Oropharyngeal Candidasis Author(s): Drew A Rosielle MD Background Oropharyngeal candidiasis (thrush) occurs commonly in seriously ill and dying patients. Risk Factors Risk factors include a) defects of cell-mediated immunity: acquired (HIV-AIDS) or drug-induced (chemotherapy, inhaled or systemic glucocorticoids); b) disruption of the oropharyngeal mucosa by cytotoxic chemotherapy ( See Fast Fact#121 ) or irradiation that includes the oropharynx; c) xerostomia (dry mouth) from any cause; d) diabetes mellitus; e) recent antibiotic use; f) dentures; and g) advanced age. Diagnosis Thrush is often asymptomatic but can lead to oral pain, oropharyngeal dysphagia, halitosis, alterations in taste, diminished appetite, and reduced oral intake. Thrush may or may not be present in cases of esophageal candidiasis, which presents as odynophagia and esophageal dysphagia. Most cases of thrush are caused by Candida albicans; C. krusei, glabrata, or tropicalis are sometimes implicated in AIDS and cancer patients. Diagnosis is made on clinical findings: white, cottage-cheese like plaques on the buccal mucosa, tongue or palate. The plaques are easily removed, leaving a red or bleeding and often painful base. A less common presentation – seen in AIDS or in patients with poorly fitting dentures – involves red, edematous, and sometimes eroded mucosal lesions, but without plaques. If diagnostic doubt exists, confirmation can be made by KOH staining a wet-prep of a plaque scraping, revealing pseudohyphal Candidal forms. Culture is not recommended as Candida species are common colonizers of the mouth. Treatment The decision to treat thrush should be based on the patient's overall condition, prognosis, symptoms, and goals of care. Treatments include either systemic or topical anti-fungal drugs. All regimens should be continued for 10-14 days. Meticulous attention to denture cleaning, if applicable, is important to prevent recurrence. If esophageal candidiasis is suspected, systemic therapy is necessary as topical treatment is ineffective. Topical drugs are the most commonly used but problems can occur due to patient objections to taste and compliance with multiple daily dosing. Nystatin suspension (“swish and swallow”) is dosed as 200,000-400,000 Units 4 - 5 times a day. It is substantially less effective in immunocompromised patients than the azole anti-fungals (30-50% vs 70-90% effective) and should not be used in this population. Clotrimazole (10 mg troches 5 times a day) is nearly as effective as the systemic azole anti-fungals; however, it is associated with a higher recurrence rate of thrush. Systemic drugs are more effective than the topicals. However they are more expensive and have significant drug-drug interactions—especially with macrolide antibiotics, anticonvulsants, benzodiazepines, methadone, and coumadin. Fluconazole is the systemic treatment of choice; it is more effective with fewer drug interactions than ketoconazole. Many dosing regimens have been described: 200 mg once, then 100 mg daily for 13 days is most commonly used. Itraconazole suspension (200 mg daily) is an alternative to fluconazole. It is better absorbed and more effective than itraconazole capsules. Note: Fluconazole resistant candidiasis is rare, but becoming more common. Itraconazole, IV or oral amphotericin, voriconazole, and caspofungin have all been used with success. Recommendations Clotrimazole troches are a reasonable first line therapy for patients in the palliative care setting if the troches are tolerable and 5 times a day dosing is acceptable. If not, and/or if the patient has problems with recurrent thrush, fluconazole should be used. References Pappas PG, Rex JH, Sobel JD, et al. Guidelines for treatment of candidiasis. Clin Infect Dis. 2004; 38:161-89. Patton LL, Bonite AJ, Shugars DA. A systematic review of the effectiveness of antifungal drugs for the prevention and treatment of oropharyngeal candidiasis in HIV-positive patients. Oral Surg Oral Med Oral Pathol Oral Radiol Endod. 2001; 92:170-179. Powderly WG, Mayer KH, Perfect JR. Diagnosis and treatment of oropharyngeal candidiasis in patients infected with HIV: a critical reassessment. AIDS Res & Human Retrovir. 1999; 15(16):1405-1412. Shay K, Truhlar M, Renner RP. Oropharyngeal candidosis in the older patient. J Am Geri Soc. 1997; 45(7):863-870. Soysa, NS, Samaranayake LP, Ellepola ANB. Cytotoxic drugs, radiotherapy and oral candidiasis. Oral Oncol. 2004; 40:971-978. Sweeney MP, Bagg J. The mouth and palliative care. Am J Hosp & Pall Care. 2000; 17(2):118-124. ACGME Competencies: Medical Knowledge, Patient Care Keyword(s): Non-Pain Symptoms and Syndromes 
#148 The Lidocaine Patch Author(s): Drew A Rosielle MD Background The Lidocaine Patch 5% is a topical analgesic developed to treat peripherally generated neuropathic pain. It is approved in the US for treating post-herpetic neuralgia (PHN). This Fast Fact reviews its mechanism of action, research data, and dosage information. Mechanism of Action The lidocaine patch is believed to provide analgesia by reducing aberrant firing of sodium channels on damaged pain fibers directly under the patch. Less than 5% of the lidocaine is absorbed, an insufficient dose to cause systemic effects or local anesthesia (patients do not feel numb under the patch). It was initially expected that only superficial pain qualities would be affected by the patch; however there is evidence that non-superficial qualities of pain (e.g. “dull” or “deep” pain) are also diminished by the patch. Nociceptive pain generation (such as sensitivity to pinprick, or hot or cold painful stimuli) is not affected. Tachyphylaxis has not been formally investigated; case reports have indicated some individuals have used the patch successfully for over a decade. Research Data Most of the research using the lidocaine patch, and all of the randomized, placebo-controlled trials, have been in neuropathic pain syndromes. It has shown modest (10-20 mm decrease in pain on the 100 mm visual analog scale) but significant efficacy in PHN in randomized, placebo-controlled trials. Due to its ease of use and lack of toxicity or drug interactions, it is being used much more widely than PHN. Multiple case-reports, open-label studies, and unpublished anecdotal reports have found the patch efficacious for a range of neuropathic conditions (e.g. diabetic neuropathy, post-surgical neuralgia), chronic low back pain, osteoarthritis, bony metastases, vertebral compression fractures, and on open decubitus ulcer beds. This latter practice is directly warned against by the manufacturer and there are no published data as to the patch’s safety when used on open wounds. Note: great caution is necessary in interpreting results of non-controlled clinical reports due to the high likelihood of a placebo effect. Administration/Toxicity The lidocaine patch comes as a 10x14 cm adhesive patch containing 700 mg of lidocaine. A box of 30 patches costs approximately $175 USD. One to three patches, or only a portion of a patch, can be placed directly over painful areas. Due to concerns about systemic lidocaine toxicity, up to a maximum of 3 patches applied simultaneously for 12 hours a day has been approved. Onset of analgesia is within a few hours and patients should be able to determine whether the patch is helpful within a week. Some patients find that pain worsens when the patch is off for 12 hours or if it is left on for more than 18 hours, therefore extended dosing has been investigated. Several pharmacokinetic studies have shown that systemic lidocaine levels remain well within the safe range with doses of up to 4 patches on for 24 hours. Adverse reactions are rare, mild, and mostly topical (rash). The patch is contraindicated in advanced liver failure due to decreased clearance of lidocaine. Summary The lidocaine patch 5% is a safe and modestly effective topical analgesic for post-herpetic neuralgia. Controlled trials are needed to determine its efficacy in the treatment of neuropathic and non-neuropathic painful conditions other than PHN. References Davies PS, Galer BS. Review of lidocaine patch 5% studies in the treatment of postherpetic neuralgia. Drugs. 2004; 64:937-947. Devers A, Galer BS. Topical lidocaine patch relieves a variety of neuropathic pain conditions: an open-label study. Clin J Pain. 2000; 16:205-208. Galer BS, et al. The lidocaine patch 5% effectively treats all neuropathic pain qualities: results of a randomized, double-blind, vehicle-controlled, 3-week efficacy study with use of the neuropathic pain scale. Clin J Pain. 2002; 18:297-301. Gammaitoni AR, Alvarez NA, Galer BS. Safety and tolerability of the lidocaine patch 5%, a targeted peripheral analgesic: a review of the literature. J Clin Pharmacol. 2003; 43:111-117. Gammaitoni AR, Davis MW. Pharmacokinetics and tolerability of lidocaine patch 5% with extended dosing. Ann Pharm. 2002; 36:236-240. Gimbel J, et al. Lidocaine patch treatment in patients with low back pain: results of an open-label, nonrandomized pilot study. Am J Therap. 2005; 12:311-319. Meier T, et al. Efficacy of lidocaine patch 5% in the treatment of focal peripheral neuropathic pain syndromes: a randomized, double-blind, placebo-controlled study. Pain. 2003; 106:151-158. ACGME Competencies: Medical Knowledge, Patient Care Keyword(s): Pain – Non-Opioids 
#149 Teaching the Family What To Expect When the Patient Is Dying Author(s): Charles F von Gunten MD, PhD Introduction Family members look to the physician and nurse to help them know what to expect when a loved one is dying. No matter what the underlying causes, there is a common final pathway that most patients travel. Indicate your desire to be helpful. Say, Many families like to know what may happen so they will be prepared, is that true for you? If they say yes, describe the features on this list and answer their questions. Social Withdrawal is normal for the dying patient as the person becomes less concerned about his or her surroundings. Separation begins first from the world – no more interest in newspaper or television, then from people – no more neighbors visiting, and finally from the children, grandchildren and perhaps even those persons most loved. With this withdrawal comes less of a need to communicate with others, even with close family. Food The patient will have a decreased need for food and drink as the body is preparing to die. This is one of the hardest things for some family to accept. There is a gradual decrease in interest in eating and appetite—even for their favorite foods. Interest may come and go. The patient is not starving to death—this reflects the underlying disease. Liquids are preferred to solids—follow the patient’s lead and do not force feed. Sleep The patient will spend more and more time sleeping; it may be difficult for them to keep their eyes open. This is a result of a change in the body’s metabolism as a result of the disease. Tell family to spend more time with the patient during those times when he/she is most alert; this might be the middle of the night. Disorientation The patient may become confused about time, place and the identity of people around him/her; he/she may see people who are not there. Some patients describe seeing family members who have already died. Sometimes patients describe welcoming or beckoning. While the patient may not be distressed, it is frequently distressing to family or health care professionals. Gently orient the patient if he or she asks. There is no need to ‘correct’ the patient if he or she is not distressed. Restlessness The patient may become restless and pull at the bed linens. These symptoms are also a change in the body’s metabolism. Talk calmly and assuredly with the patient so as not to startle or frighten them. If the patient is a danger to himself or others, you may prescribe sedating neuroleptics (e.g.chlorpromazine), or neuroleptics (e.g. haloperidol) in combination with benzodiazepines (e.g. lorazepam), to help the patient rest ( see Fast Fact #1 ). Decreased Senses Clarity of hearing and vision may decrease. Soft lights in the room may prevent visual misinterpretations. Never assume that the patient cannot hear you, as hearing is the last of the five senses to be lost. Incontinence of urine and bowel movements is often not a problem until death is very near. Invite family to participate in direct care; the nurse can help place absorbent pads under the patient for more comfort and cleanliness, or a urinary catheter may be used. The amount of urine will decrease and the urine become darker as death becomes near. Physical Changes as death approaches: Theblood pressure decreases; the pulse may increase or decrease.Thebody temperature can fluctuate; fever is common.There is increasedperspiration often with clamminess.Theskin color changes: flushed with fever, bluish with cold. A pale yellowish pallor (not to be confused with jaundice) often accompanies approaching death.Breathing changes also occur. Respirations may increase, decrease or become irregular; periods of no breathing (apnea) are common.Congestion will present as a rattling sound in the lungs and/or upper throat. This occurs because the patient is too weak to clear the throat or cough. The congestion can be affected by positioning, may be very loud, and sometimes just comes and goes. Anticholinergic medications (like scopolamine or glycopyrrolate) can help (seeFast Fact #109 ). Elevating the head of bed and swabbing the mouth with oral swabs give comfort and give the family something to do.Thearms and legs of the body may become cool to the touch. The hands and feet become purplish. The knees, ankles and elbows are blotchy. These symptoms are a result of decreased circulation.The patient will enter acoma before death and not respond to verbal or tactile stimuli. HOW TO KNOW THAT DEATH HAS OCCURREDNo breathing and heartbeat.Loss of control of bowel or bladder.No response to verbal commands or gentle shaking.Eyelids slightly open; eyes fixed on a certain spot.Jaw relaxed and mouth slightly open.Acknowledgement This Fact Fact was adapted with permission from a family information handout (The ‘Blue Sheet’) given to families of San Diego Hospice & Palliative Care Program.ReferencesTwycross R, Lichter I. The terminal phase. In: Doyle D, Hanks GWC, MacDonald N, eds. Oxford Textbook of Palliative Medicine. 2nd ed. Oxford, England: Oxford Univer¬sity Press; 1998.Ellershaw J, Ward C. Care of the dying patient: the last hours or days of life. BMJ. 2003; 326(7379):30-4.Ferris FD, von Gunten CF, Emanuel LL. Competency in End of Life Care: the last hours of living. J Palliat Med. 2003; 6(4):605-613.ACGME Competencies: Medical Knowledge, Patient CareKeyword(s): Ethics, Law, Policy Health Systems, Psychosocial and Spiritual Experience: Patients, Families, and Clinicians
#150 Prognostication in DementiaAuthor(s): Sing Tsai MD and Robert Arnold MDBackground Dementia is a syndrome of acquired and persistent impairment in cognition and intellectual functioning (1). When caused by certain diseases or injury, dementia is irreversible, leading to progressive brain failure and death. This Fast Fact reviews issues of prognostication in dementia.Natural history of dementia Olson (2003) classifies dementia into four functionally defined categories: mild, moderate, severe, and terminal. ‘Terminal dementia’ is defined as loss of communication, ambulation, swallowing, and continence. Others use the term “end-stage” or “advanced” making interpretation of prognostic data challenging. Many prognostic factors have been associated with shortened survival: male gender, older age, diabetes mellitus, CHF, COPD, cancer, cardiac dysrhythmias, peripheral edema, aspiration, bowel incontinence, recent weight loss, dehydration, fever, pressure ulcers, seizures, shortness of breath, dysphagia, low oral intake, not being awake for most of the day, low Body Mass Index, and recent need for continuous oxygen requirement. Patients admitted to the hospital with acute illness and end-stage or terminal dementia have a particularly poor prognosis. A study of hospitalized patients with end-stage dementia demonstrated that the six month mortality after hospitalization for pneumonia was 53% compared with 13% for cognitively intact patients. For patients with a new hip fracture, 55% of end-stage dementia patients died within 6 months compared with 12% for cognitively intact patients (Morrison 2000).Prognostic Systems (see table below):The National Hospice and Palliative Care Organization (NHPCO) recommends the Functional Assessment Staging (FAST), a 7-step staging system, to determine hospice eligibility. The FAST identifies progressive steps and sub-steps of functional decline. NHPCO guidelines state that a FAST stage 7A is appropriate for hospice enrollment, based on an expected six month or less prognosis, if the patient also exhibits one or more specific dementia-related co-morbidities (aspiration, upper urinary tract infection, sepsis, multiple stage 3-4 ulcers, persistent fever, weight loss >10% within six months). Luchins (1997) studied the relationship of FAST to survival in 47 patients enrolled in hospice with advanced dementia and one or more dementia-related co-morbidities. The median survival for all patients was 6.9 months; 38% survived beyond six months. Of note, 41% of patients did not demonstrate dementia progression in a manner that allowed for assigning a FAST stage. For those patients who could be assigned a FAST stage (n = 12), and who were at stage 7C or greater, mean survival was 3.2 months. The generalizability and clinical relevance of this data are greatly compromised by this very low patient number.The Mortality Risk Index (MRI), a composite score based on 12 risk factor criteria obtained from using the MDS (Minimum Data Set), has been suggested as an alternative to FAST. Mitchell (2004) developed and then validated the MRI by examining data from over 11,000 newly admitted nursing home patients. Among patients with a MRI score of ≥ 12, 70% died within 6 months (mean survival time not reported). Compared to FAST Stage 7C, the MRI had greater predictive value of six month prognosis. The MRI as only been evaluated in newly admitted nursing home residents; it has yet to be validated in the community setting or for previously established long-term nursing home residents.Medical Interventions Estimation of prognosis in severe/terminal dementia is in part dependent on the goals of care and decisions regarding the level of intervention that will be provided to treat acute medical problems such as urosepsis and malnutrition.Summary Although many prognostic risk factors have been identified there is no gold standard to help clinicians determine a less than six months prognosis with any degree of certainty. The criteria adopted by NHPCO for hospice eligibility is based on very limited research and lacks important studies to determine FAST scale reliability and validity among referring physicians and hospice staff. The MRI is a promising new scale but more research is needed. Physicians can best help their patients by working with families to help them establish goals of care and levels of medical intervention that are most consistent with current medical research and family/patient preferences. _____________________________________________Functional Assessment Staging (FAST)Stages 1. No difficulties 2. Subjective forgetfulness 3. Decreased job functioning and organizational capacity 4. Difficulty with complex tasks, instrumental ADLs 5. Requires supervision with ADLs 6. Impaired ADLs, with incontinence 7. A. Ability to speak limited to six words B. Ability to speak limited to single word C. Loss of ambulation D. Inability to sit E. Inability to smile F. Inability to hold head upMortality Risk Index Score (Mitchell)PointsRisk factor 1.9 Complete dependence with ADLs 1.9 Male gender 1.7 Cancer 1.6 Congestive heart failure 1.6O2 therapy needed w/in 14 day 1.5 Shortness of breath 1.5<25% of food eaten at most meals 1.5 Unstable medical condition 1.5 Bowel incontinence 1.5 Bedfast 1.4 Age > 83 y 1.4 Not awake most of the dayRisk estimate of death within 6 months ScoreRisk % 08.9 1-210.8 3-523.2 6-840.4 9-1157.0 = 1270.0 _____________________________________________ReferencesOlson E. Dementia and Neurodegenerative Disorders. In: Morrison RS, Meier DE, eds. Geriatric Palliative Care. New York, NY: Oxford University Press; 2003.Luchins DJ, Hanrahan P, Murphy K. Criteria for enrolling dementia patients in hospice. J Am Geriatr Soc. 1997; 45:1054-1059.Mitchell SL, Kiely DK, Hamel MB, et al. Estimating prognosis for nursing home residents with advanced dementia. JAMA. 2004; 291:2734-2740.Morrison RS, Siu AL. Survival in end-stage dementia following acute illness. JAMA. 2000; 284:47-52.Schonwetter RS, Han B, Small BJ, et al. Predictors of six-month survival among patients with dementia: an evaluation of hospice Medicare guidelines. Am J Hosp Palliat Care. 2003; 20(2):105-13.Wolfson C, Wolfson DB, Asgharian M, et al. A reevaluation of the duration of survival after the onset of dementia. N Engl J Med. 2001; 344:1111-1116.ACGME Competencies: Medical Knowledge, Patient CareKeyword(s): Prognosis
#151 Hypercalcemia of MalignancyAuthor(s): Fareeha Siddiqui MD and David E Weissman MDBackground Up to 30 percent of patients with cancer develop hypercalcemia. Approximately 50% of these patients will die within 30 days of a hypercalcemia diagnosis. The most common cancers leading to hypercalcemia are squamous cell cancers of lung, head and neck, and esophagus, breast cancer, renal cell carcinoma, lymphomas and multiple myeloma.PathophysiologyLocal osteolytic hypercalcemia due to direct effect of bone metastases.Humoral Hypercalcemia of Malignancy – secretion of parathyroid hormone related protein (PTHrP) by malignant tumors.1,25(OH)2D (vitamin D) secreting lymphomas.Ectopic secretion of authentic PTH (very rare).Symptoms/Signs Symptoms roughly correlate with the degree of hypercalcemia (corrected) and the rapidity of rise: Mild (10.5-11.9 mg/dl); Moderate (12-13.9 mg/dl) Severe(>14 mg/dl).Cognitive: sedation, delirium, coma.Gastrointestinal: anorexia, nausea, vomiting.Renal: dehydration, polyuria, thirst/polydipsia.DiagnosticsTotal serum calcium, corrected for albumin (Formula: [(4 - albumin) x 0.8] + Ca++]).Ionized calcium.Renal function, phosphate, magnesium and potassium—monitor during treatment.Anti-Tumor Therapy Treatment of the underlying malignancy with systemic therapy (e.g. chemotherapy) is essential for long-term management. In cases where further anti-neoplastic therapy is not feasible, the decision to treat or not treat hypercalcemia should be made by careful exploration of the patient’s goals of care. In advanced untreatable cancer, the decision to not treat hypercalcemia may be very appropriate.Supportive MeasuresSaline hydration and loop diuretics: Normal Saline 200-500 ml/hr increases GFR, increases filtered load of calcium, and is calciuretic. Loop diuretics (e.g. furosemide) blocks calcium resorption in the loop of Henle. Note: only use diuretics once dehydration has been corrected.Discontinue medications that can increase serum calcium (e.g. lithium, Vitamin D, supplements containing calcitriol, thiazides, calcium antacids); removal of calcium from TPN.Increase mobility if possible.Bisphosphonates are the drug class of choice for most patients. They work via blocking osteoclastic bone resorption. Pamidronate and zoledronic acid are used in the US with full efficacy noted 2-4 days after administration; responses last 1-3 weeks. May lead to hypocalcemia or azotemia; use with caution in renal dysfunction. Pamidronate = 60-90 mg. Repeat only after 7 days have elapsed after 1st dose. Repeat infusions every 2-3 weeks or longer according to the degree and of severity of hypercalcemia. Zoledronic acid = 4 mg (maximum). Wait at least 7 days before considering retreatment.Other Agents: Glucocorticoids are useful in lymphoid malignancies that secrete 1,25(OH)2 Vitamin D. Calcitonin may lead to acute reductions in serum calcium (12-24 hours) but reductions are small and transient. Calcitonin is administered intramuscularly or subcutaneously; initially 4 units/kg every 12 hours; may increase up to 8 units/kg every 12 hours to a maximum of every 6 hours. Mithramycin was the standard agent prior to bisphosphonates; now it is used only rarely due to a higher side effect profile. Gallium nitrate is usually impractical due to the need for a 5 day IV infusion. Renal Dialysis can be used in cases of acute/chronic renal failure.Summary Hypercalcemia is a common oncologic complication that often portends a very short prognosis. The decision to attempt reversal should be made after first exploring the goals of care and assessing the feasibility of future systemic anti-cancer treatments. Vigorous hydration and bisphosphonates are the cornerstones of short-term hypercalcemia therapy.ReferenceStewart AF, et al. Malignancy-Associated Hypercalcemia. In: DeGroot L, et al, eds. Endocrinology. 5th Edition. Philadelphia, PA: Saunders; 2005Roodman GD, et al. Mechanisms of bone metastasis. NEJM. 2004; 350:1655-64.Ralston SH, et al. Cancer associated hypercalcemia: morbidity and mortality: Clinical experience in 126 treated patients. Ann Intern Med. 1990; 112:499-504.ACGME Competencies: Medical Knowledge, Patient CareKeyword(s): Prognosis
#152 The Military History as a Vehicle for Exploring End-of-Life Care with VeteransAuthor(s): Lynn Hallarman MD and Clare Kearns MSWBackground 54,000 American veterans die each month and account for one quarter of all US deaths. Inquiring about military service has both practical and therapeutic benefits. Hospice care is now a covered benefit for all enrolled veterans and the Veterans Administration will purchase hospice services from local communities it serves. Military service can be a core experience in defining the way veterans live and the way they die. Knowing the components of a military history can be a useful tool in bridging the silence that often surrounds the war experience and can act as a catalyst for discussions about end of life preferences. Establishing an environment of trust is critical when speaking with war veterans about end of life care. A polite inquiry about military service is a good way to create an atmosphere of respect, keeping in mind that not all veterans will want to speak with you about the details of their war experience. Because a discussion of combat experiences can reactivate deeply buried issues, it is important to make this known to the veteran and ask if he/she wishes to proceed. Listed below are phrases to help you get started in taking a military history.Starting Questions Are you a veteran? Tell me about your military experience? What did you do in the military? When and where did you serve? What branch of the military were you in? How has it affected you?Detailed Questions What was your highest rank? Did you see combat or were you in a combat area? Did you see enemy fire or causalities? Were you a prisoner of war? Were you wounded or hospitalized? Do you currently receive care at a VA? Do you ha vea service-connected condition? If not, are you enrolled? Deepening the Military History Do you think you were changed as a result of being in the military? Please describe the changes. Do you think your experiences in the military are affecting you today? Is there anything about your experiences in the military that is still troubling you today? Do you have nightmares about the war? What was your homecoming like? Is there anything about your homecoming that is still troubling you today? Do you think your experiences in the military and your homecoming affected your relationships with family and friends when you returned? Do you keep in touch with your war buddies? Do you thi nk your military experiences are influencing the way you are now coping with your illness?If the veteran experiences significant anxiety and needs psychological assistance, or if you would like guidance, you can contact your local VA Medical Center to access their mental health clinics, trauma recovery clinics, or Vet Centers.ReferencesUS Department of Veterans Affairs. Military Health History Pocket Card for Clinicians. Available at: www.va.gov/oaa/pocketcard.Beresford L. VA Transforms End of Life Care. (Monograph.) US Department of Veterans Affairs. 2004.Patient resources can be found at: http://www.va.gov. Search for “Veteran Fact Sheets.”ACGME Competencies: Medical Knowledge, Patient CareKeyword(s): Communication
#153 Health Literacy in Palliative MedicineAuthor(s): Gary M Reisfield MD and George R Wilson MDBackground Patient/family education is a cornerstone of palliative care. The ability to comprehend information from medication labels, appointment slips, and advance directive documents is often taken for granted. A 2004 report from the Institute of Medicine (Nielson-Bohlman 2004), suggests that health literacy – the ability to read, understand and act on basic health information – is limited in nearly half of all American adults, or about 90 million people. Health literacy problems cut across all socioeconomic domains; while most people with limited literacy in the US are white and native born, prevalence is highest among underserved minorities, those with limited education, and the elderly. This Fast Fact reviews assessment and management strategies for poor health literacy.Clues to poor health literacy Guilt and shame are common in those with poor literacy skills and, in response, they develop strategies to mask their deficiencies. The first step in helping patients is to have a high index of suspicion. Suspect literacy problems when patients:Do not look at written materials (or if handed materials up-side down do not turn them right-side up).Offer excuses when asked to read written materials (e.g. left their reading glasses at home).Identify medications by color/shape rather than by name (or by opening the bottle rather than reading the label).Take medications incorrectly (and cannot describe how medications should be taken).Have difficulty keeping appointments or fill out forms incorrectly or incompletely.Screening methods People with limited health literacy skills learn to compensate – you cannot tell by looking at them. Research suggests that even though patients with limited literacy skills are masters in disguising their deficit, they are often honest to health care professionals if the professional directly addresses the issue: Is there anything that would make it hard for you to learn today? Do you have any trouble seeing, or hearing, or reading? You can ask patients to read from a prescription label or educational brochure. You can say, Some patients have difficulty with text, maybe because it’s too small or because it’s too complicated, or because they just have trouble reading. This is important to your health, so I want to make sure you understand. Would you please look at the first few words and tell me what they say? If there are doubts about comprehension, one can follow with, Explain to me what this means to you?Management strategiesWritten materials: When possible, use materials with large print and simple language (the National Work group on Cancer and Literacy recommends written materials to be at or below the 5th grade level). Pictograms can improve comprehension and memory of instructions.Verbal communication: Many patients with poor written literacy also have poor oral literacy. All patients – but especially those with limited literacy – can struggle with medical jargon, basic numeracy, and unfamiliar concepts. Plan to spend extra time; slow down your rate of speech, use simple, common words and short sentences. When possible, limit information to a maximum of three key items; consider tape/digital recordings of conversations for later reference.Medication regimens: Simplify regimens; minimize the number of medications, the number of pills, and the frequency of administration. Fill several pill boxes for patients.Assure comprehension Use the Teach-back technique: explain instructions to a patient and have them teach them back to you, repeating until they have demonstrated satisfactory understanding. Use open-ended phrasing such as, Please explain to me how you’re going to take this medication, rather than, Do you understand how to take this medication? Elicit questions: patients with limited literacy tend to ask few questions; invite questions using an open-ended format, What questions do you have? Enlist allies: ask office staff, caregivers and pharmacists to educate, assist, and support when necessary. In end-of-life situations, literacy of key caregivers may need to be assessed. Follow-up: plan on more frequent visits and telephone follow-up calls. Refer: for patients with a prognosis of at least several months, working with an adult literacy program can improve skills and heighten self-esteem. The nonprofit ProLiteracy (www.proliteracy.org ) has over 1,200 affiliates in the US and is represented in every state. Finally, work to create a shame-free environment; educate your staff about compassionate care for patients with limited literacy. The AMA foundation offers a variety of health literacy resources including a kit (Health Literacy: Help Your Patients Understand) and a newsletter (Health Literacy Update), both available at http://www.ama-assn.org/ama/no-index/physician-resources/8115.shtml.ReferencesBaker DW, Williams MV, Parker RM, et al. Development of a brief test to measure functional health literacy. Patient Educ Couns. 1999; 38(1):33-42.Davis TC, Long SW, Jackson RH, et al. Rapid estimate of adult literacy in medicine: a shortened screening instrument. Fam Med. 1993; 25(6):391-395.Davis TC, Williams MV, Marin E, et al. Health literacy and cancer communication. CA Cancer J Clin. 2002; 52(3):134-149.McCray AT. Promoting health literacy. J Am Informatics Association. 2005; 12:152-163.National Assessment of Adult Literacy. A first look at the literacy of America’s adults in the 21st century. National Center for Education Statistics. U.S. Department of Education. Institute of Education Sciences. NCES 2006-470.Nielsen-Bohlman L, Panzer AM, Kindig DA (eds). Health Literacy: A Prescription to End Confusion. Washington, DC: National Academies Press; 2004. Available at: http://www.nap.edu/catalog/10883.html.Parker RM, Ratzan SC, Lurle N. Health literacy: a policy challenge for advancing high-quality health care. Health Affairs. 2003; 22(4):147-153.Praska JL, Kripalani S, Seright AL, Jacobson TA. Identifying and assisting low-literacy patients with medication use: a survey of community pharmacies. Ann Pharmacother. 2995; 39:1441-1445.Ratzan SC, Parker RM. Introduction. In: National Library of Medicine Current Bibliographies in Medicine: Health Literacy. Selden CR, Zorn M, Ratzan SC, Parker RM, eds. NLM Pub. No. CBM 2000-1. Bethesda, MD: National Institutes of Health, U.S. Department of Health and Human Services; 2000.ACGME Competencies: System Based Practice, Interpersonal and Communications SkillsKeyword(s): Communication, Ethics, Law, Policy Health Systems
#154 Use of Interpreters in Palliative CareAuthor(s): Sue Howard MDBackground During times of emotional stress and conversations that touch the inner soul, it is most comforting and safe for patients and families to describe feelings and thoughts in their primary language. This Fast Fact reviews key issues when using interpreters in the palliative care setting.Using Health Care Interpreters vs. FamilyMedical interpreters who have completed specific training and follow national standards/ethics of practice (National Council on Interpreting in Healthcare) should be utilized in caring for patients with limited English proficiency.Although using family members may seem convenient, it is fraught with problems. There is no assurance they will have the necessary language skills to convey medical information, and the patient may not feel comfortable expressing their feelings through family members. Family members may misinterpret medical phrases, censor sensitive/ taboo topics, or summarize discussions rather than translating them completely. Family members may have strong emotions that affect their objectivity and impartiality. In addition, being the bearer of bad news or discussing contentious information may have negative implications for a family member following the encounter.Ensure to the patient and family that confidentiality will be maintained.Interview StrategiesBrief the interpreter before meeting with the patient/family. Explain the purpose of the encounter, your role, and the physical set-up of the room. It is important to warn the interpreter ahead of time if you will be discussing end-of-life issues and/or using the word “dying.” Emphasize that your statements should not be changed and that if your statement cannot be translated directly, the interpreter should alert you to rephrase.You and the interpreter should plan to be at eye level with the patient and you should directly face the patient while speaking, just as you would in a non-interpreter situation. Avoid the tendency for the patient and provider to give the appearance of speaking to the interpreter, rather than to each other. When at the bedside, you and the interpreter should be on the same side of the bed next to each other to prevent unnecessary turning of the patient’s head from side to side.Keep your sentences and questions concise.Avoid saying to the interpreter, “Ask him...” or “Tell her….” Speak directly to the patient using the first person: “I am here today to talk to you about….”Professional interpreters are required to interpret all information that is provided as outlined in their code of ethics. Do not tell the interpreter, “Do not translate this….”Resist the tendency to raise one’s voice when trying to communicate with someone who speaks a different language.Pause at the end of each statement to allow the interpreter time to interpret.Pay attention to non-verbal clues that the patient/family is confused or that your comments were misinterpreted (e.g. puzzled look, furrowed brow). Stop and clarify that the interpreter and patient/family have understood the information.Following the interview give the interpreter an opportunity to ask you questions or make comments about the encounter. If the discussion was emotionally charged, check-in with the interpreter, “How are you doing?” Or, “Was that very distressing for you?” The need to use an interpreter implies that significant cultural differences exist between you and the patient/family. Professional interpreters can help you to provide effective and efficient communication that is culturally sensitive. Check with your institution to see what resources are available to work with limited English proficiency patients. Companies that provide trained telephone language interpreters for health care workers include Language Line (http://www.languageline.com ), Pacific Interpreters (www.pacificinterpreters.com ), CyraCom International (www.cyracom.net ), Telelanguage (http://www.telelanguage.com ) and MultiLingual Solutions (http://www.mlsolutions.com ).Additional Resources Diversity Rx (http://www.diversityrx.org ) and the Cross Cultural Health Care Program (http://www.xculture.org ). Information about caring for patients with limited English proficiency:http://www.lep.gov .ReferencesCrawley LM, Marshall PA, Lo B, Koenig BA. Strategies for Culturally Effective End-of-Life Care. Ann Intern Med. 2002; 136:673-679.Haffner L. Translation is not enough. Interpreting in a Medical Setting. West J Med. 1992; 157:255-259.Haffner L. Guide to Interpreter Positioning in Health Care Settings. The National Council on Interpreting in Health Care Working Paper Series; 2003. Available at:http://www.ncihc.org/mc/page.do?sitePageId=57022&orgId=ncihc .Herndon E, Joyce L. Getting the Most from Language Interpreters. Family Practice Management. 2004; 11:37-40.Minas M, Stankovska M, Ziguras S. Working with Interpreters: Guidelines for Mental Health Professionals. The Victorian Transcultural Psychiatry Unit; 2001. Available at: http://www.vtpu.org.au/docs/interpreter_guidelines.htm.Pigazzini M, Tindaro F. The Interpreter in the Therapeutic Relationship: therapist or client. Psychomedia; 1999. Available at: http://www.psychomedia.it/pm/grpind/transcult/interpreter.htm.Professional Standards Committee of Registry of Interpreters for the Deaf. Interpreting in Mental Health Settings. Standard Practice Paper; 1997-1999. 2007 version available at:http://www.rid.org/interpreting/Standard%20Practice%20Papers/index.cfm. ACGME Competencies: Interpersonal and Communication Skills; ProfessionalismKeyword(s): Communication
#155 Completing a Death CertificateAuthor(s): Nikkisha Prentice and Robert Arnold MDBackground Physicians are responsible for providing proper documentation of death. This Fast Fact reviews key steps in the completion of a death certificate.Importance of Proper Completion Death certificate information is a permanent record of death. It is usually necessary for burial and settlement of the deceased’s estate. Written documentation of the cause of death, in addition to direct communication, may provide family members with closure and peace of mind. Death certificates are also used to 1) evaluate the general health of the population, 2) assess the prevalence of medical problems among specific groups, 3) identify areas where medical research may have the greatest impact, and 4) apportion health services, grants, and other resources to common illnesses.Basic GuidelinesState laws provide guidelines for who can complete a death certificate. Certification and completion of death certificates is usually the primary responsibility of the physician. However, in some states, death may be certified by the attending physician or attending advanced practice nurse.Verify the correct spelling of names.Personally sign the death certificate; stamps and faxes are unacceptable.Complete all required items. If necessary, write “unknown” or “pending further study.”Common Errors Do not delay completion of the certificate. Some states have specific time periods and civil and/or criminal penalties for non-completion. Moreover, funeral homes will typically not proceed with burial without the death certificate.Do not use abbreviations.Spell out the month; do not use numbers.Use 24 hour clock rather than 12:00 midnight.Do not alter the document; erase any parts or use white-out.Avoid cursive writing; print clearly or type using black ink. Causality of Death This section of the certificate often consists of two parts. The first part asks for a sequential chain of events that led to death, and the time interval between onset of a condition and death. The most immediate cause of death is stated on line a and the underlying causes follow on lines b, and so on. In assessing the approximate interval between onset and time of death, terms such as “unknown” or “approximately” may be used and general terms such as “minutes,” “hours,” and “days” are acceptable. The second part asks about other significant conditions that contributed to death, but that did not result in the underlying cause stated previously.Mechanism vs. Cause of Death It is important not to write the mechanism of death (i.e. cardiac arrest, respiratory arrest) as the cause of death. The mechanism of death is the physiologic derangement or biochemical disturbance by which the cause of death exerts its lethal effect. For accurate public health records, the cause of death (e.g. chronic obstructive pulmonary disease) is more helpful than the mechanism of death (e.g. respiratory failure). When there is doubt as to the cause of death, it is acceptable to enter “unknown” or “pending further study.” In some states, a condition may also be listed as “probable.” As additional medical information, such as an autopsy report, becomes available, the certifying physician should immediately report amendments to the state vital records office or local registrar.Note: Death certificates are governed by state statutes; variations exist in reporting requirements and specific terminology. Listed below are common terms and definitions that are generally interchangeable between states. The table presents some examples. Immediate (or Principle) Cause = Final complication resulting in death. Intermediate (or Antecedent or Underlying) Cause = Disease or condition causing the immediate cause of death. Underlying (or Contributory) Cause = The condition present before and leading to the intermediate or immediate cause of death.Example 2 Example 3 Example 4 Line A Acute Exacerbation of Obstructive Airway DiseasePulmonary EmbolismPneumocystis jiroveci pneumoniaLine B Chronic BronchitisDeep Venous ThrombosisAcquired Immunodeficiency Syndrome Line C Metastatic Non- Small Cell Lung CancerHuman Immunodeficiency VirusMechanism of death Respiratory ArrestRespiratory ArrestSeptic ShockOther Significant Conditions SmokingStroke, HemiparesisReferencesCampos-Outcalt D. Cause-of-death certification: Not as easy as it seems. J Fam Practice. 2005. 54(2):134-138Herring ME. The Death Certificate. AAHPM Bulletin (reprinted with permission of the Camden Medical Society). Winter 2005; 8-9.Lakkireddy DR, Gowda MS, Murray CW, Basarakodu KR, Vacek JL. Death Certificate Completion: How well are physicians trained and are cardiovascular causes overstated? Am J Med. 2004; 117:492-498.Magrane BP, Gilliland MG, King DE. Certification of death by family physicians. Am Fam Physician. 1997; 56:1433-8.Myers KA, Farquhar DE. Improving the accuracy of death certification. CMAJ. 1998; 158:1317-23.Nowels D. Curbside consultation: completing and signing the Death Certificate. Am Fam Physician. 2004; 70(9):1873.Physicians’ Handbook on Certification of Death. Department of Health and Human Resources, Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, National Center for Health Statistics; April 2003. DHHS Publication No. (PHS) 2003-1108.ACGME Competencies: Systems-Based PracticeKeyword(s): Ethics, Law, Policy Health Systems
#156 Evaluating Requests for Hastened DeathAuthor(s): Tim Quill MD and Robert Arnold MDBackground A patient’s request to a health care professional to help hasten death is not uncommon. The motivation for this request is usually a combination of relentless physical symptoms, progressive debility, in combination with a loss of sense of self, loss of control, fear of the future, and fear of being a burden on others. Some physicians are frightened by these requests, feeling that they are being asked to cross unacceptable professional boundaries. Others may be tempted to quickly accede, imagining that they would want the same thing in the patient’s shoes. But requests for a hastened death may provide an entree into a patient’s experience of suffering, and may lead to opportunities for more effective treatment if fully evaluated. In general, the clinician should carefully clarify, explore, evaluate, intensify treatment, and support the patient to ensure a full understanding of the request and to ensure that all alternatives have been considered before responding. This Fast Fact provides guidance on how to evaluate and initially respond to a patient who raises the topic of a hastened death.Fast Fact #159 will explore how to respond when the request for a hastened death persists after a full evaluation and search for alternatives.Clarify which question is being asked before responding. Is the patient simply having thoughts about ending his life (very common), or is he exploring the possibility of a hastened death in the future if his condition deteriorates, or is he exploring your willingness to assist right now (1, 2)?Support the patient, and reinforce your commitment to trying to find a mutually acceptable solution for the patient’s problem and to continue to work through the process. This does not mean violating fundamental values, but it does mean searching in earnest with the patient and family to find a way to approach the dilemma (3). Attend to your own support by discussing the patient with trusted colleagues and/or with your multidisciplinary team.Evaluate the patient’s decision-making capacity. Is she seeing her medical condition clearly? Is the request proportionate to the level of unrelieved suffering? Are there dominating aspects of anhedonia, worthlessness and guilt, or is the capacity for pleasure and joy preserved in some small ways? Is this request consistent with the patient’s past values? Get help from an experienced psychiatrist or psychologist if you are unsure (4).Explore the many potential dimensions that may contribute to the patient’s “unbearable” suffering to be sure you (and the patient) fully understand its underlying cause(s). Sometimes in may be an unrelenting physical symptom, other times feelings of depression, or a family or spiritual crisis, or perhaps a combination of many factors (1, 2).Respond to the associated emotions, which may be strong and conflicted. Try to empathically imagine what the patient is going through and asking for. Distinguish your own feelings and reactions from those of the patient.I ntensify treatment of any potentially reversible elements of the patient’s suffering. Depending on the patient’s circumstances, offer to increase treatment of pain or other physical symptoms, consider biological or interpersonal treatment of depression; see if an appropriate and acceptable spiritual counselor is available. Be creative and brainstorm potential solutions with your multidisciplinary team (1, 2).Respond directly to the request for hastened death only after this multidimensional evaluation has been completed. If the patient has full decision-making capacity and all alternative approaches to the patient’s unbearable suffering have been fully considered, then re-explore exactly what is being requested, and look for mutually acceptable ways to potentially respond –seeFast Fact #159 (5). Note that many patients may be looking for the potential of an escape they will never use, but a smaller number will be looking for a way to hasten death in the present.ReferencesQuill TE. Doctor, I want to die. Will you help me? JAMA. 1993; 270:870-873.Block SD, Billings JA. Patient requests to hasten death: Evaluation and management in terminal care. Arch Intern Med. 1994; 154:2039-2047.Quill TE, Cassel CK. Nonabandonment: A central obligation for physicians. Ann Intern Med. 1995; 122:368-374.Block SD. Assessing and managing depression in the terminally ill patient. ACP-ASIM End-of-Life Care Consensus Panel. Ann Intern Med. 2000; 132:209-218.Quill TE, Lo, Brock DW. Palliative options of last resort: A comparison of voluntarily stopping eating and drinking, terminal sedation, physician-assisted suicide, and voluntary active euthanasia. JAMA. 1997; 278:1099-2104.ACGME Competencies: Interpersonal and Communications Skills, ProfessionalismKeyword(s): Communication, Ethics, Law, Policy Health Systems, Psychosocial and Spiritual Experience: Patients, Families, and Clinicians
#157 Malignant Pleural Effusions Interventional ManagementAuthor(s): Vincent Thai MD and Ron Damant MDBackground Malignant pleural effusions can cause dyspnea, cough, and reduced exercise tolerance. Over three quarters of malignant pleural effusions are due to lymphomas or cancers of the breast, lung, and ovary. The average survival of patients with refractory cancer and pleural effusions is 4-6 months (1). Survival is considerably worse for patients with poor functional status due to progressive cancer. This Fast Fact reviews key facts regarding effusion management.Symptom Causality and Goals of Care The cause of dyspnea, even in the presence of a known malignant effusion, is not always evident. Common confounding problems include congestive heart failure, chronic obstructive pulmonary disease, pulmonary emboli, pericardial effusions, parenchymal lung metastases, ascites, and radiation lung injury. A ‘diagnostic’ therapeutic thoracentensis may be indicated to determine if removal of fluid leads to an improvement in the patient’s dyspnea. The decision to proceed with thoracentensis should be made after considering the overall goals of care, functional status, prognosis, and presence of co-morbid conditions. Guidelines suggest that no more than 1.5 L of fluid can be safely removed at any one time to prevent reexpansion edema, but some authors suggest that as much as 20ml/kg of fluid can be safely removed (2).Management Options: Repeated thoracentesis is appropriate for patients with a short prognosis (weeks). The re-accumulation rate is approximately 98% by 30 days (3). Problems associated with this approach include the need for repeated procedures, pneumothorax, infection, and the development of loculation. Chest tube drainage alone involves the use of a large-bore tube to drain the pleural cavity followed by the tube’s removal, without sclerosis. This prevents re-accumulation in 11-40% of patients at 30 days follow-up (4). Systemic chemotherapy or hormonal therapy is the best long-term management option for treatment sensitive tumors (seeFast Facts #14 ,99 ). Chemosclerosis requires chest tube insertion followed by instillation of a sclerosing agent. It has a success rate of 70-95% with no fluid re-accumulation at 1 month (if the pleural and parietal surfaces are apposed after drainage and pleural fluid drainage is less than 100 ml/day at the time of instillation) (5). Heavy tumor burden, reflected by low pleural pH ( <7.2) or glucose concentration ( < 3.3 mmol/L), is associated with a lower success rate and shorter survival (6). Talc is inexpensive and has the lowest re-accumulation rates (3-8% after 30 days), compared to doxycycline and bleomycin (1). Talc is rarely associated with ARDS and systemic embolization; more common side effects are pain and fever. Sclerosis requires a large-bore chest tube which often remains in place for 5-7 days – a major consideration in patients with a short prognosis. Thorascopic installation of talc is the most effective technique in highly selected patients, but it is more costly (7,8). Providing adequate pain management is crucial for chest tube insertion and any sclerosis technique. Small-bore catheters can be inserted radiologically in the ambulatory setting and connected to a drainage bag for intermittent drainage by nurses or family members at home. Chemosclerosis can be accomplished through the small catheter. When done in the inpatient setting, sclerosis via a small catheter has a success rate of 62 to 95%; outpatient chemosclerosis may be less efficacious but there has been no head-to-head comparison. Tunneled pleural catheters are similar to small-bore catheters but involve a cuff which is tunneled under the skin to prevent infections. A Canadian retrospective study using an outpatient tunneled pleural catheter system showed symptom improvement in 96% of patients at 2 weeks post insertion; spontaneous pleurodesis was noted in 44% of all patients (9). Pleuroperitoneal shunts are occasionally indicated in patients with intractable effusions and trapped lungs. The shunt drains pleural fluid into the abdomen via a subcutaneous reservoir that the patient must pump ~ 400 times/day. Cost, limited efficacy and frequent malfunctioning all limit usefulness of this procedure. In addition, the development of malignant ascites can occur if the patient lives long enough. Pleurectomy is only indicated in patients who are expected to have a prolonged survival. There is significant associated morbidity (20%) and mortality (10%) (10).ReferencesBelani CP, Pajeau TS, Bennett CL. Treating malignant pleural effusions cost consciously. Chest. 1998; 113:78S-85S.Putnam JB,Jr. Malignant pleural effusions. Surg Clin North Am. 2002; 82:867-883.Anderson CB, Philpott GW, Ferguson TB. The treatment of malignant pleural effusions. Cancer. 1974; 33:916-922.Grodzin CJ, Balk RA. Indwelling small pleural catheter needle thoracentesis in the management of large pleural effusions. Chest. 1997; 111:981-988.DeCamp MM,Jr, Mentzer SJ, Swanson SJ, Sugarbaker DJ. Malignant effusive disease of the pleura and pericardium. Chest. 1997; 112:291S-295S.Heffner JE, Nietert PJ, Barbieri C. Pleural fluid pH as a predictor of pleurodesis failure: Analysis of primary data. Chest. 2000; 117:87-95.Shaw P, Agarwal R. Pleurodesis for malignant pleural effusions. Cochrane Database of Systematic Reviews 2004, Issue 1. Art. No.: CD002916. DOI: 10.1002/14651858.CD002916.pub2.Belani C, Einarson TR, Arikian SR, Doyle J. Cost-effectiveness analysis of pleurodesis in the management of malignant pleural effusion. J Oncology Management. 1995; Jan/Feb:24-34.Tremblay A, Michaud G. Single-center experience with 250 tunnelled pleural catheter insertions for malignant pleural effusion. Chest. 2006; 129:362-368.Rusch VW. Pleurectomy/decortication and adjuvant therapy for malignant mesothelioma. Chest. 1993; 103:382S-384S.ACGME Competencies: Medical knowledge, Patient careKeyword(s): Non-Pain Symptoms and Syndromes
#158 Respiratory Secretion ManagementAuthors Gary Hsin MD and James Hallenbeck MDBackground Excessive or thick respiratory secretions are common in patients with pulmonary and neurologic diseases and for many patients in the last few days of life. ThisFast Fact reviews treatment options for managing distressing secretions.Pathophysiology Mucus consists of water (~ 95%), glycoproteins, and small amounts of proteoglycans and lipids. The mucus layer of the respiratory tract rests against a periciliary watery layer around cilia, which facilitates upward movement of secretions (1,2). For patients with ineffective mucociliary clearance, poor cough, or excessive/abnormal mucus production, dyspnea, cough, tachypnea, or sensations of choking/gagging may occur.Pharmacological TreatmentsHydration : Studies of COPD patients have not demonstrated improved mucus production or clearance with added hydration (1,1).Expectorants : Guaifenesin acts by stimulating gastric mucosa and the gastric nerve to stimulate the cough reflex, and also induces a vagally mediated increase in airway secretion. The evidence for its efficacy is based on a single study in chronic bronchitis patients (3).Drying agents : Anticholinergic agents such as scopolamine or glycopyrrolate may be very helpful for excessive mucus production. Watch for anticholinergic side-effects (dry mouth, urinary retention), or over-drying, which may cause overly thick mucus and mucus plugging (seeFast Fact #109).Aerosolized solutions : Nebulized hypertonic saline (3%) has demonstrated effectiveness in cystic fibrosis (CF) patients, but not in COPD. Hypertonic/hypotonic solutions can trigger bronchospasm (1,2). Sodium bicarbonate (2-7.5%) solutions are used in aerosolized forms to elevate the pH of tracheobronchial secretions, which weaken the saccharide structures of the mucus. The effects are additive when used with N-acetylcysteine (3).Antibiotics : respiratory infection commonly leads to increased mucus production; antibiotics may be indicated depending on the overall goals of care.Bronchodilators : Beta-adrenergic agonists and drugs containing aminophylline improve mucus clearance by increasing ciliary activity (1).Disulfide disruptor : Nebulized N-acetylcysteine (Mucomyst) severs the disulfide bonds of glycoproteins in mucus, and lowers its viscosity. Some studies have demonstrated effectiveness with this treatment. It does have an unpleasant smell and can cause bronchospasm; therefore, co-administration of a beta-adrenergic agonist should be considered (1,2,4).Enzymatic agents : In CF, DNA is released by leukocytes, increasing mucus viscosity (1). Recombinant human DNase (dornase alfa or Pulmozyme) cleaves DNA and has been shown to be effective.Non-pharmacological TreatmentsSuctioning : For many patients with a weak cough reflex, gentle suctioning can be very helpful. However, deep suctioning should be avoided and can be very irritating.Postural Drainage/Chest Physiotherapy (CPT) : CPT loosens secretions and facilitates cough or suctioning (1).External Oscillation Device : This device achieves the same degree of efficacy as CPT. It is a small, lightweight, plastic, pipe-shaped device that is inexpensive (~$50) and easy to use (4).Devices : such as PEP (positive expiratory pressure) masks and external compression vests may also be appropriate for certain patients.Initial Management RecommendationsAssess quantity and quality (thick/thin) of secretions.Consider providing immediate relief through suctioning, postural drainage, or nebulization before long term maintenance therapy, such as antibiotics.Select agents based on the balance of benefits vs. undesirable effects (examples: guaifenesin may worsen nausea [undesired]; scopolamine dries/thickens secretions, causes dry mouth [undesired], and sedation, which may or may not be desirable.ReferencesAboussouan LS. Role of mucolytic agents in the treatment of COPD. In: Rose BD (ed).UpToDate . Waltham, MA: UpToDate; 2006.Connolly MA. Mucolytics and the critically ill patient: help or hindrance?AACN Clinical Issues. 1995; 6(2):307-15.Manaker S, Tietze KJ, Wittbrodt ET. Pulmonary pharmacotherapy. In: Fishman AP, et al (eds).Fishman???s Pulmonary Diseases and Disorders ,Vol 2. 3rd Ed. New York, NY: McGraw-Hill;1998: 2643-60.O???Reagan, AW & Berman JS. Bronchiectasis. In: Crapo JD, et al (eds).Baum???s Textbook of Pulmonary Diseases . 7th Ed. Philadelphia, PA: Lippincott Williams & Wilkins; 2004: 257-78.ACGME Competencies: Medical Knowledge, Patient CareKeyword(s): Non-Pain Symptoms and Syndromes
#159 Responding to a Request for Hastening DeathAuthor(s): Timothy Quill MD and Robert M Arnold MDBackground Requests for hastened death among terminally ill patients occur commonly (seeFast Fact #156 ). With good symptom management, psychological and spiritual support, most patients do not persist in this request. This Fast Fact focuses on possible ways of responding to patients who continue to want a hastened death despite every effort to find appropriate palliative care alternatives. This Fast Fact does not address such requests by surrogate decision makers of patients who have lost decision-making capacity.Reflect on your personal feelings about the request and discuss with other professionals. These cases are emotionally and ethically difficult. Brainstorm options with other members of the care team including physician colleagues, nurses, psychologists, chaplains and others. Allow trusted colleagues to support your emotional reactions.Seek out consultation/2nd Opinion. Make sure you understand the medical, legal and ethical issues involved in responding to a particular request for hastened death. Palliative care and/or ethics consultations are invaluable. Independent second opinions may be helpful in clarifying the prognosis and ensuring that all potentially effective therapeutic alternatives have been considered.Learn the possibilities. Possibilities are listed below from least to most ethically controversial. Considering these possibilities assumes that aggressive measures to control physical, psychological and spiritual suffering have been exhausted and/or rejected by the patient:Withdrawal of life-sustaining treatments . While most clinicians consider stopping invasive treatments under these circumstances (e.g. ventilators, ICDs, feeding tubes), simpler therapies such as insulin, antibiotics, or steroids might also be voluntarily discontinued if they are prolonging life against the patient’s wishes. (Unlike the other possibilities, there is widespread legal and ethical consensus about the permissibility of this response based on the right to bodily integrity.) Voluntary withdrawal of oral intake. Patients may choose to stop eating and drinking to shorten the dying process. Completely stopping oral food and liquids will typically result in death within two weeks. Sedation for severe intractable physical symptoms (seeFastFacts #106 ,107 ). The intent of sedation is to relieve intolerable suffering by a reduction in patient consciousness. If artificial hydration and feeding are simultaneously stopped, death will come within 1-2 weeks. Assisted Suicide. Assisted suicide is defined as someone who provides the means for another person to end their life (e.g. prescribing an overdose amount of medication), but the patient is the one to decide if and when the medicine is actually used, and the patient is responsible for taking the medicine. Physician-assisted suicide is illegal in the United States except for the state of Oregon. Decision making process. Have a detailed conversation regarding the risk and benefits of the different possibilities that fit the patient’s clinical circumstances, and which the patient, family and you find ethically acceptable. Be as specific as possible, and document your thinking process clearly. Thus, if stopping eating and drinking is being considered, be sure everyone understands the importance of complete cessation of drinking or else the process can take months rather than weeks.Balance integrity and non-abandonment. It is not always possible to find common ground between the patient and physician. When asked if one can support a particular act, a physician needs to be as specific as possible about what he/she can and cannot do, and why. While the physician should not violate personal principles to respond to a request he/she finds unacceptable, he/she should search in earnest with the patient and family for alternative options that might be mutually acceptable. Typically, this approach will allow the physician to maintain integrity while not abandoning the patient, even if agreement on the particular act in question is not possible (1-4).ReferencesQuill TE, Cassel CK. Nonabandonment: A central obligation for physicians. Ann Intern Med. 1995; 122:368-374.Quill TE, Lo, Brock DW. Palliative options of last resort: A comparison of voluntarily stopping eating and drinking, terminal sedation, physician-assisted suicide, and voluntary active euthanasia. JAMA. 1997; 278:1099-2104.Quill TE, Byock I. Responding to intractable terminal suffering: the role of terminal sedation and voluntary refusal of food and fluids. ACP-ASIM End-of-Life Care Consensus Panel. Ann Intern Med. 2000; 132:408-414.Quill TE, Coombs-Lee B, Nunn S. Palliative options of last resort: Finding the least harmful alternative. Ann Intern Med. 2000; 132:488-93.ACGME Competencies: ProfessionalismKeyword(s): Communication, Ethics, Law, Policy Health Systems
#160 Screening ICU DeliriumAuthor(s): Richard Altman MD, Eric Milbrandt MD, MPH, and Robert Arnold MDBackground Delirium is an acute, fluctuating change in mental status, accompanied by sleep/wake cycle disruption, inattention, and altered perceptions (hallucinations/delusions) (seeFast Fac ts #1 ,60 ). Delirium can be hypoactive or hyperactive. Patients with hypoactive delirium are calm, but inattentive and manifest decreased mobility. Patients with hyperactive delirium are agitated and combative, and also lack the ability to maintain attention to complete tasks. Delirium can be considered a marker of acute brain dysfunction, much like shock is evidence for dysfunction of the cardiovascular system (1).ICU Delirium Delirium occurring in the ICU is associated with an increased length of hospitalization, increased need for institutionalization, and higher short and long-term mortality (2). In the ICU, delirium occurs in as many as 80% of patients, but is often overlooked or misdiagnosed because of the difficulty of assessing mental states in intubated patients. Three assessment tools have been described in the literature to aid in delirium diagnosis.The Confusion Assessment Method-Intensive Care Unit (CAM-ICU) Assessment Tool is the best documented method of diagnosing delirium in the ICU (3). This tool was specifically designed for use in non-verbal (i.e. mechanically ventilated) patients. With the CAM-ICU, delirium is diagnosed when patients demonstrate 1) an acute change in mental status or fluctuating changes in mental status, 2) inattention measured using either an auditory or visual test, and either 3) disorganized thinking, or 4) an altered level of consciousness. Importantly, the CAM-ICU can only be administered if the patient is arousable to voice without the need for physical stimulation. The CAM-ICU includes very specific assessment questions/tools, found online athttp://www.icudelirium.org/delirium/CAM-ICUTraining.html . When administered by a nurse, the CAM-ICU takes only 1 to 2 minutes to conduct and has a minimum of 93% sensitivity and 89% specificity for detecting delirium as compared to full DSM-IV assessment by a geriatric psychiatrist (2,4). National guidelines recommend routine use of the CAM-ICU for delirium assessment in all critically ill patients and treatment with haloperidol when delirium is present (5). However, these recommendations are based on expert opinion and limited case series. It remains unknown whether diagnosis and/or treatment of delirium will lead to better patient outcomes. While there are some early observational cohort data suggesting that patients treated with haloperidol have lower hospital mortality, this finding needs confirmation in a randomized, controlled trial before being applied to routine patient care.The Intensive Care Delirium Screening Checklist assesses eight features of delirium: altered level of consciousness, inattention, disorientation, hallucinations, psychomotor agitation/retardation, inappropriate mood/speech, sleep/wake cycle disturbance, and symptom fluctuation. The sensitivity and specificity of this tool were 99% and 64% respectively in one report (6).The Delirium Screening Checklist is another recent tool that uses a checklist similar to the Intensive Care Delirium Screening Checklist (7).Recommendation It is believed that prompt recognition and treatment of ICU delirium is important for patient safety. Use of rapid tools such as CAM-ICU can help identify ICU delirium and are recommended when assessing mental status changes. The benefit of routine use of these screening tools is yet to be tested.ReferencesEly EW, Siegel MD, Inouye SK. Delirium in the Intensive Care Unit: An Under-Recognized Syndrome of Organ Dysfunction. Seminars in Respiratory & Critical Care Medicine. 2001; 22(2):115-126.Ely EW, Inouye SK, Bernard GR, Gordon S, Francis J, May L, Truman B, Speroff T, Gautam S, Margolin R, Hart RP, Dittus R. Delirium in Mechanically Ventilated Patients: Validity and Reliability of the Confusion Assessment Method for the Intensive Care Unit (CAM-ICU). JAMA. 2001; 286(21):2703-2710.Ely EW, Truman B. The Confusion Assessment Method for the ICU (CAM-ICU) Training Manual. Available at: http://www.icudelirium.org/delirium/training-pages/CAM-ICU%20trainingman.2005.htm. Accessed April 27, 2009.Ely EW, Margolin R, Francis J, May L, Truman B, Dittus R, Speroff T, Gautam S, Bernard GR, Inouye SK. Evaluation of delirium in critically ill patients: validation of the Confusion Assessment Method for the Intensive Care Unit (CAM-ICU). Crit Care Med. 2001; 29:1370-9.Jacobi J, Fraser GL, Coursin DB, et al. Clinical practice guidelines for the sustained use of sedatives and analgesics in the critically ill adult. Crit Care Med. 2002; 30:119-41.Bergeron N, Dubois MJ, Dumont M, Dial S, Skrobik Y. Intensive Care Delirium Screening Checklist: evaluation of a new screening tool. Intensive Care Med. 2001; 27:859-864Otter H, Martin J, Basell K, von Heymann C, et al. Validity and reliability of the DDS for severity of delirium in the ICU. Neurocrit Care. 2005; 2(2):150-8.ACGME Competencies: Medical Knowledge, Patient CareKeyword(s): Prognosis
#161 Opioid Use in Renal FailureAuthor(s): Robert Arnold MD, Peg Verrico RPh, Sara N Davison MDBackground Chronic pain is common in chronic kidney disease impacting 50% of hemodialysis patients, 82% of whom experience moderate to severe pain. The absorption, metabolism, and renal clearance of opioids are complex in renal failure. However, with the appropriate selection and titration of opioids, patients with renal failure can achieve analgesia with minimal risk of adverse effects. This Fast Fact reviews recommendations for opioid use in the setting of renal failure and in patients receiving chronic dialysis.Not Recommended for Use: Meperidine is not recommended in renal failure due to accumulation of normeperidine, which may cause seizures.Codeine has been reported to cause profound toxicity which can be delayed and may occur after trivial doses. We recommend that codeine be avoided in patients with a Glomerular Filtration Rate (GFR) <30 mL/min.Dextropropoxyphene is associated with central nervous system (CNS) and cardiac toxicity and is not recommended for use in patients with renal failure.Morphine is not recommended for chronic use in renal insufficiency (GFR <30 mL/min) due to the rapid accumulation of active, nondialyzable metabolites that are neurotoxic. If morphine must be used, avoid long-acting preparations and monitor closely for toxicity (seeFast Facts #57 ,58 ).Use with Caution: Oxycodone is metabolized in the liver with 19% excreted unchanged in the urine. There are reports of accumulation of both the parent compound and metabolites in renal failure resulting in CNS toxicity and sedation.Hydromorphone , as the parent drug, does not substantially accumulate in hemodialysis patients. Conversely, an active metabolite, hydromorphone-3-glucuronide, quickly accumulates between dialysis treatments but appears to be effectively removed during hemodialysis. With careful monitoring, hydromorphone may be used safely in dialysis patients. However, it should be used with caution in patients with a GFR < 30mL/min who have yet to start dialysis or who have withdrawn from dialysis.Safest in Renal Insufficiency: Fentanyl is considered relatively safe in renal failure as it has no active metabolites. However, very little pharmacokinetic data exist regarding fentanyl in end stage renal disease. While some studies have shown decreased clearance in renal failure, most studies do not show drug accumulation. Fentanyl is not dialyzable due to high protein binding and a high volume of distribution.Methadone is considered relatively safe in renal failure. It has no active metabolites and limited plasma accumulation in renal failure due to enhanced elimination in the feces. However, precautions regarding the use of methadone exist (SeeFastFacts#75 ,86 ). It does not appear to be removed by dialysis.Opioid Dosing Given the lack of pharmacokinetic and pharmacodynamic data of opioids in renal failure, it is difficult to advocate for specific analgesic treatment algorithms. However, the following guide has been proposed (Broadbent 2003) for the initial dosing of the safer opioids in renal failure.Creatinine Clearance > 50 mL/min: normal dosing.Creatinine Clearance of 10-50 mL/min: 75% of normal.Creatining Clearance < 10 mL/min: 50% of normal. The “normal opioid dose” for any given patient is the dose that adequately relieves pain without unacceptable adverse effects (seeFast Fact #20 ). While opioids can be used in renal insufficiency, they require closer monitoring and constant reassessment to ensure that accumulation of active metabolites does not result in toxicity. This should not preclude the effective use of opioids in these patients. References:Chambers EJ, Germain M, Brown E, eds. Supportive Care for the Renal Patient. New York, NY: Oxford University Press; 2004.Davison SN. Pain in hemodialysis patients: prevalence, cause, severity, and management. Am J Kidney Diseases. 2003; 42(6):1239-1247.Murphy EJ. Acute pain management pharmacology for the patient with concurrent renal or hepatic disease. Anaes Intensive Care. 2005; 33(3):311-22.Dean M. Opioids in renal failure and dialysis patients. J Pain Symptom Manage. 2004; 28(5):497-504.Broadbent A, Khor K, Heaney A. Palliation and chronic renal failure: opioid and other palliative medications – dosage guidelines. Progress in Palliative Care. 2003; 11(4):183-90.ACGME Competencies: Medical Knowledge, Patient CareKeyword(s): Pain – Opioids
#162 Advance Care Planning in Chronic IllnessAuthor(s): Sara N Davison MDBackground A cornerstone of excellent medical care is helping patients decide how future medical interventions match their personal goals and values for care near the end-of-life. This Fast Fact reviews key concepts of the Advance Care Planning (ACP) process.Advance Care Planning is aprocess of communication between the patient, the family/health care proxy, and staff for the purpose of prospectively identifying a surrogate, clarifying treatment preferences, and developing individualized goals of care near the end of life.Advance Directives (e.g. living wills, durable powers of attorney for health care) arelegal documents with capabilities and requirements that vary between jurisdictions.Primary Goals of ACPEnhance patient and family education about their illness, including prognosis and likely outcomes of alternative care plans.Define the key priorities in end-of-life care and develop a care plan that addresses these issues.Shape future clinical care to fit the patient's preferences and values.Other Potential Benefits of the ACP processHelp patients find hope and meaning in life, and help them achieve a sense of spiritual peace.Strengthen relationships with loved ones.Timing At a minimum, ACP should be considered whenever the health care provider would not be surprised if that patient died within the next 12 months.Facilitating ACPTake the lead in starting the discussion . Many patients are reluctant to initiate an ACP discussion; physicians and nurses can “open the door” to such discussions by asking, How do feel things are going? Have you given any thought to how you wish to be cared for should your illness worse?Explain the rationale for ACP . Patients identify ACP as an important part of medical care if they have a clear idea of how the process will benefit them: I’d like to spend some time talking to you about the future course of your illness so that I have a clear understanding of your wishes.Use good communication skills. Do not use medical jargon (e.g. ‘ventilator’); language used should be positive (I want to ensure you receive the kind of treatment you want). Use empathetic listening skills (using words, posture and appropriate touch to convey sense of caring) to help build a trusting relationship. Ensure privacy and allow sufficient time for the discussion.Provide information. Patients require realistic information on prognosis and treatment options with an emphasis on how you expect their illness will impact their daily function.Identify a surrogate. Patients should be encouraged to both identify a surrogate decision-maker and, most importantly, discuss their wishes with this individual. The power of the ACP discussion is the sharing of information between patient and the patient’s surrogate decision maker and other family members, and the health care team. The surrogate should have the greatest knowledge of the patient’s preferences and values. If desired, offer to facilitate a discussion between the patient and their surrogate or other family members.Identify how future decision-making will occur. A patient may have specific desires for how information is shared among family members – this needs to be explicitly discussed.Determine goals of care. If decisions need to be made at the same time as an ACP discussion, this is an appropriate venue to establish the goals of care (seeFast Fact #16 ,65 ).CautionsThe ACP process must be sensitive to disease, gender, age, social and cultural contexts.Providing opportunities to discuss end-of-life issues does not mean everyone will want or be able to do so at that moment. ACP is an evolving process that requires varying amounts of time to be effective. Patients often need time to reflect on information and how it impacts their lives.ReferencesMartin DK, Thiel EC, Singer PA. A new model of advance care planning. Observations from people with HIV. Arch Intern Med. 1999; 159: 86-92.Briggs L. Shifting the focus of advance care planning: using an in-depth interview to build and strengthen relationships. Innovations in End-of-Life Care. 2003; 5(2). Available at: http://www2.edc.org/lastacts/archives/archivesMarch03/default.asp.Johnstone SC, Pfeifer MP, McNutt R. The discussion about advance directives. Arch Intern Med. 1995; 155:1025-1030.ACGME Competencies: Patient Care, Professionalism, Systems-based practice; Interpersonal and Communication SkillsKeyword(s): Communication, Ethics, Law, Policy Health Systems
#163 Decision Making in Chronic Kidney DiseaseAuthor(s): Sara N Davison MDBackground Care of chronic kidney disease (CKD) patients requires expertise in advance care planning (ACP), including attention to ethical, psychosocial, and spiritual issues related to starting, continuing, withholding, and stopping dialysis. This Fast Fact reviews key concepts of the ACP process for CKD patients.Fast Facts #207 and208 discuss decision-making and management at the time of dialysis withdrawal.Barriers to ACPDialysis patients are not aware of their poor prognosis and falsely assume they can be kept alive indefinitely on dialysis; end-of-life issues are commonly avoided until late in the illness.Many health professionals believe that ACP may destroy hope and that the focus of care should be on their “life-sustaining therapy,” such as dialysis.Cognitive dysfunction associated with advanced CKD may prevent the ability for meaningful participation in ACP. Discussions must occur early in the illness while comprehension and decision-making capacity are preserved.Key aspects of ACP in CKD (SeeFast Fact #162 for general ACP recommendations)ACP should be initiatedprior to the need for dialysis. The importance of early discussions is underscored by the fact that only ~ 60% of nephrologists would consider stopping dialysis for a non-decisional patient with unclear prior wishes.Include family in ACP discussions:CKD patients are often afraid to talk to their loved ones about their preferences; some patients will choose to prolong their time on dialysis due to family pressure.Surrogates must be aware of patient preferences and the values upon which these preferences were based.Including family is critical in achieving many of the goals of ACP such as strengthening relationships with and relieving emotional and financial burdens on loved ones. Provide detailed information as part of pre-dialysis education:All treatment options should be fully reviewed: 1) available dialysis modalities, 2) not starting dialysis and continuing conservative management, 3) a time-limited trial of dialysis, and 4) stopping dialysis with expectation of death. (See below for clinical practice guidelines on not starting or discontinuing dialysis.)Estimate prognosis (seeFast Fact #191) . The annual death rate for patients initiating dialysis is 20-25%; 15-25% of these deaths result from decisions to withdraw dialysis. Patients with CKD who elect dialysis generally experience progressive functional decline over months to years, punctuated by episodes of life-threatening complications. Elderly or chronically ill patients with co-morbid diseases, at the initiation of dialysis, can be expected to have greater complications and a shorter survival. Poor prognostic factors such as older age, low serum albumin, poor functional status, and comorbid illnesses such as diabetes and cardiovascular disease can be used to estimate prognosis. Anuric patients, who elect to not initiate or discontinue dialysis, typically survive for 7-14 days. The prognosis is longer for patients with residual renal function who continue to make urine.Emphasize how you expect their illness and proposed treatments will impact their daily function. Discuss the impact of the various dialysis options on day-to-day function. Guidelines for not starting or withdrawing dialysis (1):Patients who, being fully informed and making voluntary choices, decline to begin or request dialysis be stopped.Patients who no longer posses decision-making capacity, but who have previously indicated refusal of dialysis (oral or written).Patients who do not posses decision-making capacity and whose surrogate declines dialysis or determines it should be discontinued.Patients with irreversible, profound neurological impairment such that they lack signs of thought, sensation, purposeful behavior, and awareness of self and environment.Patients whose medical conditions precludes the technical process of dialysis.ReferencesShared Decision-Making in the Appropriate Initiation of and withdrawal from Dialysis. Clinical Practice Guideline. Washington DC: Renal Physicians Association and American Society of Nephrology; 2000. Available at: http://jasn.asnjournals.org/cgi/content/full/11/7/1340.Chambers EJ, Germain M, and Brown E, eds. Supportive Care for the Renal Patient. New York, NY: Oxford University Press; 2004.Davison SN. Facilitating Advance Care Planning for Patients with End Stage Renal Disease: the Patient Perspective. CJASN. 1:1023-8. Available at: http://cjasn.asnjournals.org/cgi/content/abstract/1/5/1023.Holley JL. Palliative Care in End Stage Renal Disease: Focus on Advance Care Planning, Hospice Referral, and Bereavement. Seminars in Dialysis. 2005; 18(2): 154-156.Michel DM, Moss AH. Communicating Prognosis in the Dialysis Consent Process: A Patient-Centered, Guideline-Supported Approach. Advances in CKD. 2005; 12 (2): 196-201.ACGME Competencies: Medical Knowledge, Patient Care, Systems Based Practice; Interpersonal and Communication SkillsKeyword(s): Communication, Psychosocial and Spiritual Experience: Patients, Families, and Clinicians
#164 Informed Consent in Palliative Care - Part IAuthor(s): David E Weissman MD and Arthur Derse MD, JDBackground Informed consent is frequently misunderstood as something that only applies to research trials or a form that a patient signs to indicate understanding and agreement when undergoing an invasive procedure. This Fast Fact reviews the legal basis for informed consent.Fast Fact #165 will discuss common myths about informed consent in the care of seriously ill and dying patients.Definition Informed consent is a process, not a signature, whereby a physician discloses key information to help patients make a choice among healthcare options. The informed consent process requires that three conditions be met: a) the patient is able to make a voluntary choice, b) the patient is informed (see below), and c) the patient has the capacity to make medical decisions.Legal Standard The legal standard of informed consent varies between states. Some use: what areasonablepatient would want to know; in other states the standard is,what a reasonablephysician should provide. A failure to meet the legal standard may meet the threshold for liability.Information No matter which legal standard is operational, the consensus among national medical and ethical organizations is that following information should be provided to meet the spirit of the informed consent doctrine:The patient's diagnosis, if known;The nature, purpose, risks and benefits of a proposed treatment or procedure;The nature, purpose, risks and benefits of alternative treatments or procedures;The risks and benefits of not receiving or undergoing a treatment or procedure.Emergency Exception to Informed Consent —physicians may proceed with treatment in emergency situations when all of the following criteria are met:Life threatening emergency and time is of the essence.Patient is not decisional and no legal surrogate decision maker is available.Reasonable person would consent to the emergency treatment.Therapeutic Privilege A long-standing legal principle is that physicians may withhold information if they believe the information would harm the patient. The use of this privilege should be restricted to rare instances when there is good evidence that providing information will upset a patient so he/she “could not rationally engage in a conversation about therapeutic options and consequences” (Meisel 1996). Physicians should not use the privilege out of concern that with information, the patient will refuse a recommended treatment, nor out of fear of provoking normal emotional reactions to bad news.Summary The purpose of the informed consent doctrine is to promote autonomy of the individual in medical decision making (Meisel 1996). However, the informed consent process is often viewed by physicians as being counter to an equally desirable social goal – a physician’s responsibility for a patient’s well-being and promotion of health. The point of balance between these two social goals is frequently misunderstood, and will be discussed in the next Fast Fact.ReferencesAmerican Medical Association. Informed Consent. Available at: http://www.ama-assn.org/ama/pub/category/4608.html.American Medical Association. AMA Position on Provision of Life-Sustaining Medical Treatment. Available at: http://www.ama-assn.org/ama/pub/physician-resources/medical-ethics/about-ethics-group/ethics-resource-center/end-of-life-care/ama-policy-provision-life-sustaining-medical.shtml.Meisel A and Kuczewski. Legal and ethical myths about informed consent. Arch Int Med. 1996; 156:2521-2526.Weissman DE. Decision making at a time of crisis near the end of life. JAMA. 2004; 292:1738-1743.ACGME Competencies: Medical Knowledge, Patient Care, Systems Based Practice; Interpersonal and Communication SkillsKeyword(s): Communication, Ethics, Law, Policy Health System
#165 Informed Consent in Palliative Care - Part IIAuthor(s): David E Weissman MD and Arthur Derse MD, JDBackground InFast Fact #164 , the legal basis for the informed consent process was reviewed; this Fast Fact discusses common myths about informed consent that arise in palliative care. Readers wishing more information should read the excellent review by Meisel and Kuczewski.Myths:Use of Signed Consent Forms—Myth: Federal or state laws require written informed consent (patient signature) for invasive procedures .FALSE: The use of signed consent forms are used per local hospital or institutional or accrediting organization policies. They are generally not mandated by law or federal/state regulation.Note: state law may mandate written consent for certain tests or high risk treatment (e.g. HIV, genetic testing, or electroconvulsive therapy) and federal law may require written consent in some circumstances (e.g. transfers from emergency departments). Signed consent forms may not shield the physician from claims of negligence due to failure to provide informed consent if the physician did not fulfill the informed consent process (seeFast Fact #164 ).Emergency Transport to a Medical Facility—Myth: No informed consent is necessary for patients admitted to a hospital in transfer from a nursing home, of for patients transported to the hospital following a 911 call. FALSE: There is no “implied consent” just because 911 or a transport ambulance was called; such patients require the same level of informed consent discussions for medical care decisions as any other patient, unless the medical situation satisfies the criteria for the emergency exception ( Fast Fact #164 ).Low Risk Treatments—Myth: No informed consent is necessary when starting “low risk” life sustaining treatments such as IV antibiotics, intravenous hydration, feeding-tube placement, or blood products. FALSE: All these treatments represent interventions with risks and alternatives. An informed consent discussion is especially necessary in seriously ill or dying patients where the option of no intervention is a reasonable choice; the failure to discuss not using life sustaining intervention represents a failure to provide full informed consent. Also, patients should be informed that if a life sustaining treatment becomes too burdensome (a risk of any treatment), the patient may withdraw his or her consent and the treatment will be withdrawn.Present options but not a recommendation—Myth: Informed consent means that patients should choose among medical option without physicians introducing their bias toward one specific option. FALSE: The physician’s obligation is to present medical information accurately to the patient or to the individual responsible for the patient’s care and to make recommendations for management in accordance with good medical practice. The physician has an ethical obligation to help the patient make choices from among the therapeutic alternatives.Documentation—Myth: An informed consent discussion needs no special documentation except in cases of invasive procedures. FALSE: Even if not legally required, the content and outcome of an informed consent discussion should always be documented in the medical record and include the elements noted in Fast Fact #164 as an indication that the ethical and legal requirements of the process of informed consent have been fulfilled.ReferencesMeisel A, Kuczewski. Legal and ethical myths about Informed Consent. Arch Int Med. 1996; 156:2521-2526.Brett A, Rosenberg JC. The adequacy of informed consent for placement of gastrostomy tubes. Arch Intern Med. 2001; 161:745-748.American Medical Association. Informed Consent. Available at: http://www.ama-assn.org/ama/pub/category/4608.html.American Medical Association. AMA Position on Provision of Life-Sustaining Medical Treatment. Available at: http://www.ama-assn.org/ama/pub/physician-resources/medical-ethics/about-ethics-group/ethics-resource-center/end-of-life-care/ama-policy-provision-life-sustaining-medical.shtml.ACGME Competencies: Interpersonal and Communications SkillsKeyword(s): Communication, Ethics, Law, Policy Health Systems
#166 Once Daily Oral Morphine FormulationsAuthor(s): Drew A Rosielle MDBackground In recent years two once-a-day long-acting oral morphine formulations have been introduced in the US: Kadian and Avinza. These formulations have unique properties which are important for their safe and effective use. To prevent confusion due to similar generic names, this Fast Fact will use trade-names for Kadian and Avinza, and “ER-morphine” to describe extended-release formulations which are usually dosed q12 hours (e.g. MS Contin).Kadian capsules contain tiny granules of morphine layered with an inert polymer which releases morphine slowly within the gastrointestinal tract. Its tmax (time to maximum serum levels after consumption) of ~9.5 hours is the longest of any long-acting morphine preparation. For example, most ER-morphine products have a tmax of 2-3 hours. Despite this, some patients do seem to require q12 hour dosing, although for most q24 hour dosing is adequate.Avinza capsules contain tiny granules which are a mixture of immediate-release and delayed-release morphine such that therapeutic serum levels are achieved rapidly (~1/2 hour) and then maintained for 24 hours. In its steady-state there is essentially no peak-trough phenomenon. Avinza contains fumarate, limiting total daily doses to 1600mg to prevent fumaric acid toxicity. Alcohol, including alcohol-containing medications, cannot be taken with Avinza as this can lead to a rapid dissolution of the granules and release of morphine.Clinical Use Head-to-head studies of Kadian and Avinza with ER-morphine confirm that they should be used as if they were bioequivalent (e.g. ER-morphine 45mg q12 hours = 90mg once a day of Avinza). No studies have shown that either is safer, more effective, or has fewer side effects than ER-morphine. Theoretically, patients will have less end-of-dose failure (“rebound” pain due to serum morphine levels dropping prior to a patient’s next scheduled dose) with these longer-acting preparations, but this effect has not been shown to be clinically meaningful in trials. Because of their long duration of action, dose titration should not be more frequently than every 2 days. Both Avinza and Kadian capsules can be opened and the granules sprinkled onto applesauce for patients who have trouble swallowing pills. Care should be given that the granules are not chewed, crushed, or dissolved. Kadian granules can also be suspended in water and administered down a large bore (≥16F) gastrostomy tube (the pellets become lodged in smaller tubes which include most nasogastric tubes). Neither of these dosing techniques is safe with ER-morphine or ER-oxycodone. It is not clear whether administering Avinza down a gastrostomy tube is safe; this has not been described in the literature, nor is it part of its manufacturer’s prescribing information. The average wholesale price of a month’s supply of 60mg daily of either formulation is approximately $200—roughly double that of generic ER-morphine.Recommendations Avinza and Kadian are the only long-acting oral morphine products that can be used with individuals who cannot swallow pills (or for people with gastrostomy tubes in the case of Kadian). Their expense and lack of superiority to other long-acting oral opioid formulations limits recommending their use beyond this indication.ReferencesBroomhead A, Kerr R, Tester W, et al. Comparison of once-a-day sustained-release morphine formulation with standard oral morphine treatment for cancer pain. J Pain Symptom Manage. 1997; 14:63-73.Caldwell JR, Rapoport RJ, Davis JC, et al. Efficacy and safety of a once-daily morphine formulation in chronic, moderate-to-severe osteoarthritis pain: results from a randomized, placebo-controlled, double-blind trial and an open-label extension trial. J Pain Symptom Manage. 2002; 23:278-291.Collins SL, Faura CC, Moore A, McQuay HJ. Peak plasma concentrations after oral morphine: a systematic review. J Pain Symptom Manage. 1998; 16:355-402.Gourlay GK. Sustained relief of chronic pain. Pharmacokinetics of sustained release morphine. Clin Pharmacokinet. 1998; 35:173-190.Jones R, Hale E, Talomsin L, Phillips R. Kapanol™ capsules. Pellet formulation provides alternative methods of administration of sustained-release morphine sulfate. Clin Drug Invest. 1996; 12:88-93.Portenoy RK, Sciberras A, Eliot L, et al. Steady-state pharmacokinetic comparison of a new, extended-release, once-daily morphine formulation, Avinza™, and a twice-daily controlled-release morphine formulation in patients with chronic moderate-to-severe pain. J Pain Symptom Mange. 2002; 23:292-300.Avinza Prescribing Information, Ligand Corporation. Available at: www.fda.gov/MEDwatch/safety/2005/avinza_PI.htm.Kadian Prescribing Information, Alpharma Inc. Available at: http://www.kadian.com/pages/getfile.aspx?id=1C6197AB-8F83-43E7-B239-D4615293989BACGME Competencies: Medical Knowledge, Patient CareKeyword(s): Pain – Opioids
#167 Health Professional Burnout - Part IAuthor(s): Linda Blust MDBackground Health professionals caring for seriously ill/dying patients and their families are frequently exposed to distressing emotional situations and profound suffering. Lack of attention to health providers’ stress responses to this suffering can lead to burnout, which has consequences for the provider and his/her interpersonal relationships. This Fast Fact will describe burnout and its risk factors, and review essential research regarding health professionals and burnout.Fast Facts #168-170 will address symptoms, consequences, avoidance and assessment of burnout.Definitions: Burnout is a . . . “Psychological syndrome in response to chronic interpersonal stressors on the job” (Maslach 1982).“State of mental and/or physical exhaustion caused by excessive and prolonged stress” (Girdin 1996). Common features (adapted from Maslach 1982) A predominance of mental or emotional exhaustion, fatigue, and depression.The symptoms are more mental and behavioral than physical.The symptoms are work-related.Burnout manifests in persons with no previous history of psychopathology.Decreased effectiveness and work performance result from negative attitudes and behaviors. Situational Risk FactorsPhysician Worklife Study: 2326 US physicians identified via AMA masterfile responded to a 38-item mailed questionnaire developed and validated for this study. Predictors of stress were: Demands of solo practice, long work hours, time pressure, and complex patients.Lack of control over schedules, pace of work, and interruptions.Lack of support for work/life balance from colleagues and/or spouse.Isolation due to gender or cultural differences. Hospital consultants in the UK: 882 gastroenterologists, radiologists, surgeons, and oncologists responded to 12-item General Health Questionnaire and Maslach Burnout Inventory. Sources of stress were: Work overload and its effect on home life.Feeling poorly managed and resourced.Managerial responsibility.Dealing with patients’ suffering.Individual Risk FactorsAt risk earlier in careerLack of Life-partnerAttribution of achievement to chance or others rather than one’s own abilitiesPassive, defensive approach to stressLack of involvement in daily activitiesLack of sense of control over eventsNot open to change ReferencesGirdin DA, Everly GS, Dusek DE. Controlling Stress and Tension. Needham Heights, MA: Allyn & Bacon; 1996.Linzer M, et al. Physician stress: results from the physician worklife study. Stress and Health. 2002; 18: 37-42.Linzer M, et al. Predicting and preventing physician burnout: results from the United States and the Netherlands. Am J Med. 2001; 111:170-175.Maslach C. Burnout: The Cost of Caring. Englewood Cliffs, NJ; Prentice-Hall; 1982.Maslach C, Schaufeli WB, Leiter MP. Job burnout. Annual Review of Psychology. 2001; 52:397-422.Ramirez AJ, et al. Mental health of hospital consultants: the effects of stress and satisfaction at work. Lancet. 1996;347: 724-728.Ramirez AJ, et al. Changes in mental health of UK hospital consultants since the mid-1990s. Lancet. 2005; 366:742-744.Schaufeli WB, Maslach C, Marek T, eds. Professional Burnout: Recent Developments in Theory and Research. Washington, DC: Taylor & Francis; 1993.ACGME Competencies: ProfessionalismKeyword(s): Psychosocial and Spiritual Experience: Patients, Families, and Clinicians
#168 Health Professional Burnout - Part IIAuthor(s): Linda Blust MDBackground As described inFast Fact #167 , burnout is a “psychological syndrome in response to chronic interpersonal stressors on the job” (Maslach 1982). This Fast Fact will explore symptoms of burnout and its personal and professional consequences.Fast Facts #169 and170 will describe avoidance and assessment of burnout.Symptoms of each sequential stage of burnoutStress Arousal: anxiety, irritability, hypertension, bruxism, insomnia, palpitations, forgetfulness, and headaches.Energy Conservation: Work tardiness, procrastination, resentment, morning fatigue, social withdrawal, increased alcohol or caffeine consumption, and apathy.Exhaustion: Chronic sadness, depression, chronic heartburn, diarrhea, constipation, chronic mental and physical fatigue, the desire to “drop out” of society.ConsequencesPersonal Depletion of emotional and physical resources.Negative self-image: feelings of incompetence and lack of achievement.Self-neglect: 35% of Johns Hopkins’ medical graduates had no a regular source of health care.Questioning of previously held spiritual beliefs.Neglect of family and social obligations.Mental Illness: anxiety, depression, substance abuse, suicide. Substance Abuse: MD lifetime risk is 10-14%.MD suicide rates similar to general population for both gendersRelative Risk of MD suicide versus other professionals Male MDs: 1.1-3.4Female MDs: 2.5-5.7Female MDs complete suicide as often as male MDs Professional Longer Work hours: If I work harder, it will get better.Withdrawal, absenteeism, and reduced productivity.Depersonalization: attempt to create distance between self and patients/trainees by ignoring the qualities that make them unique individuals.Loss of professional boundaries leading to inappropriate relationships with patients/trainees.Compromised patient care.45% of University of Washington residents who self-report burnout also report providing “suboptimal care.” References:Booth JV, Grossman D, Moore J, et al. Substance abuse among physicians: a survey of academic anesthesiology programs. Anesthesia Analg. 2002; 95: 1024-1030.Center C, et al. Confronting depression and suicide in physicians: a consensus statement. JAMA. 2003; 289:3161-3166.Gross CP, et al. Physician heal thyself? Regular source of care and use of preventive health services among physicians. Arch Int Med. 2000; 160:3209-3214.Linzer M, et al. Predicting and preventing physician burnout: results from the United States and the Netherlands. Am J Med. 2001; 111:170-175.Maslach C. Burnout: The Cost of Caring. Englewood Cliffs, NJ: Prentice-Hall; 1982.Maslach C, Schaufeli WB, Leiter MP. Job burnout. Ann Rev Psychology. 2001; 52:397-422.Shanafelt TD, Bradley KA, Wipf JE, Back AL. Burnout and self-reported patient care in an internal medicine residency program. Ann Int Med. 2002; 136:358-367.ACGME Competencies: ProfessionalismKeyword(s): Psychosocial and Spiritual Experience: Patients, Families, and Clinicians
#169 Health Professional Burnout - Part IIIAuthor(s): Linda Blust MDBackgroundFast Facts #167 and168 have described burnout, its risk factors, symptoms, and consequences. This Fast Fact will address strategies to avoid burnout while sustaining personal and professional health, integrity, and growth.Fast Fact #170 will describe assessment tools validated for burnout.Individual StrategiesReflection upon work: journaling, discussion with colleagues. Am I burned-out/healthy?Why do I do this/continue to do this?What inspired/moved/surprised me today? Attend to health: diet, exercise, rest, regular health care.Plan activities that rejuvenate: Play!Professional supervision: Regular interaction with a mental health professional with the express purpose of exploring dynamics of the provider/patient relationship.Make time for yourself Plan vacations at regular intervals.Allow for “time-out” when stressors increase. Interpersonal StrategiesGive important relationships priority – strengthen existing relationships with family and friends.Expand your community beyond existing relationships through activism or spiritual engagement.Professional StrategiesDebrief emotional events: Reach out to colleagues.Seek out or strengthen a mentor relationship.Write about your work for a larger audience.Utilize your institution’s Critical Incident Response Team if available.Psychosocial rounds with colleagues to explore these issues.Schwartz Center Rounds: interdisciplinary hospital rounds to explore emotions surrounding provider/patient interactions. Advocate for change in your job, organization, or profession.Triggers for Professional CounselingPersistent feelings of sadness, exhaustion, anger, worthlessness, hopelessness, suicidal ideation, or anxiety interfering with work or interpersonal relationships.Self-prescribing sedative/hypnotic medication.Substance abuse: alcohol, prescription, or non-prescription drugs.Other ‘addictions’ interfering with work/relationships: gambling, exercise.Persistent sleep disturbance: nightmares, difficulty initiating or staying asleep, early morning awakening.Loss of professional boundaries: Inappropriate relationships with patients, families, or trainees.Lack of attention to patients’ rights, safety, or autonomy.If, after careful attention to the variables within your control, you still feel burned-out and at risk for serious consequences, it may be necessary to temporarily or permanently leave your current job to regain your health.ReferencesGundersen L. Physician burnout. Ann Int Med. 2001; 135:145-148.Kuehn Kelly C. Strategies to Balance Training, Your Personal Life. ACP-ASIM Observer. 2001.Meier DE, Back AL, Morrison RS. The inner life of physicians and care of the seriously ill. JAMA. 2001; 286:3007-3014.Remen RN. The doctor’s dilemma: returning service, grace, and meaning to the art of healing. Whole Earth. Summer 2000: 4-10.The Kenneth B Schwartz Center. Available at: http://www.theschwartzcenter.org/.ACGME Competencies: ProfessionalismKeyword(s): Psychosocial and Spiritual Experience: Patients, Families, and Clinicians
#170 Health Professional Burnout - Part IVAuthor(s): Linda Blust MDBackgroundFast Facts #167-169 have described burnout, its risk factors and consequences, and coping strategies. This Fast Fact will briefly describe assessment tools used in health professional research. Additionally, it provides a validated screening tool utilized widely in education.Maslach Burnout Inventory (CPP, Inc.)Designed for use in health care and other service industries.Evaluates emotional exhaustion, depersonalization, and reduced personal accomplishment.Well-validated; readily available; utilized by Physician Worklife Study.10-15 minutes to complete.Cost: approximately $1.25 per test, with additional fee for scoring key.General Health Questionnaire (Bank 1980)12-item screen for symptoms of psychiatric morbidityReliable in community and occupational settingsUtilized in conjunction with Maslach Burnout Inventory in ongoing, longitudinal UK study of burnout and psychiatric morbidity in hospital consultantsSelf Assessment Exercise (Girdin 1996) How often do you . . . a) almost always; b) often; c) seldom; d) almost neverFind yourself with insufficient time to do things you really enjoy?Wish you had more support/assistance?Lack sufficient time to complete your work most effectively?Have difficulty falling asleep because you have too much on your mind?Feel people simply expect too much of you?Feel overwhelmed?Find yourself becoming forgetful or indecisive because you have too much on your mind?Consider yourself in a high pressure situation?Feel you have too much responsibility for one person?Feel exhausted at the end of the day? Calculate your total score: a) = 4, b) = 3, c) = 2, d) = 1. Your total? _____ A total of 25-40 indicates a high stress level that could be psychologically or physically debilitating.ReferencesBank M, et al. The use of the general health questionnaire as an indicator of mental health in occupational settings. Journal of Occupational Psychology. 1980; 53:187-194.Maslach Burnout Survey. CPP, Inc. Available at: https://www.cpp.com/en/detailprod.aspx?pc=35.Girdin DA, Everly, GS, Dusek DE. Controlling Stress and Tension. Needham Heights, MA: Allyn & Bacon; 1996.Maslach C. Burnout: The Cost of Caring. Englewood Cliffs, NJ: Prentice-Hall; 1982.Ramirez AJ, et al. Mental health of hospital consultants: the effects of stress and satisfaction at work. Lancet. 1996; 347:724-728.Ramirez AJ, et al. Changes in mental health of UK hospital consultants since the mid-1990s. Lancet. 2005; 366:742-744.ACGME Competencies: ProfessionalismKeyword(s): Psychosocial and Spiritual Experience: Patients, Families, and Clinicians
#171 Methadone for Neuropathic PainAuthor(s): David E Weissman MDBackground Prescriptions for methadone have greatly increased in the past six years (1). The reason for this increase is likely related to two factors: reduced cost relative to other potent opioids and basic science data suggesting that methadone may be particularly useful in treating neuropathic pain. Two previousFast Facts #75 ,86 ) reviewed methadone’s pharmacological properties. This Fast Fact examines the research base regarding methadone and neuropathic pain and reviews the rise in methadone-related deaths.Historical ContextPrior to 1985, when long-acting morphine preparations were introduced, methadone was commonly prescribed for cancer-related pain as it had a longer duration of action than morphine. However, it was well appreciated that methadone had a higher risk of respiratory depression due to drug accumulation with chronic dosing – an effect not associated with other opioids, for which there is no drug accumulation in the setting of normal renal function.Prior to 1990 there was a widespread belief that opioids were relatively ineffective in treating neuropathic pain. Since then, there been a much greater understanding that opioids are an effective part of neuropathic pain treatment.Basic science data Methadone inhibits reuptake of norepinephrine and serotonin in a similar manner to newer anti-depressants, some of which are effective against neuropathic pain (e.g. venlafaxine). Also, methadone binds to the NMDA receptor, a known modulator of neuropathic pain. Finally, methadone has demonstrated efficacy in animal models of neuropathic pain (1).Patient data Small non-controlled case series and at least one small randomized study (methadone vs. placebo) have demonstrated that methadone can reduce neuropathic pain in both cancer and non-cancer patients (2-5). There is no data, for or against the proposition, that methadone is superior to other opioids for neuropathic pain. A 2004 Cochrane Collaborative review found, “there is no trial evidence to support the proposal that methadone has a particular role in neuropathic pain of malignant origin” (6). Furthermore, the review cautioned clinicians about the danger of methadone-induced respiratory depression due to its long terminal half-life.Methadone deaths There is a growing awareness that the increased prescription of methadone is being paralleled by a similar increase in methadone-related deaths. Florida, Utah, North Carolina, Oregon, Indiana, Maryland, Alabama and West Virginia have all reported a spike in deaths related to methadone since 2000 (7,8). The US Department of Health and Human Services convened an expert panel in 2003 to investigate the rise in methadone deaths and concluded that the rise was largely due to the increasing use of methadone as an analgesic (9). The Center for Disease Control published a report detailing data from Utah in 2005, suggesting that part of the problem was due to increased prescribing (10). The current data seem to suggest that the general increased supply of methadone, via legitimate prescribing, is leading to deaths due to accidental overdose through improper prescribing or illicit diversion/recreational use. In addition to concern about respiratory depression, there has been a relatively recent observation that methadone, unlike morphine or hydromorphone, can prolong the QTc interval and lead to serious cardiac conduction abnormalities. Note: the overall number of opioid-related deaths has increased, not just from methadone. Note: there are no data on untimely deaths related to methadone prescribing in hospice/palliative care patients.Summary The renewed interest in an old drug based on new science holds exciting promise of benefit for the many patients with neuropathic pain. However, clinical research has yet to confirm or deny a unique clinical role for methadone compared to other opioids. The risk of respiratory depression should give clinicians pause before prescribing methadone based solely on the theory that it is a superior opioid in neuropathic pain. Furthermore, given that diversion of legitimate opioid prescriptions to the illicit market can occur, even in the practice of hospice and palliative care, physicians and hospice agencies need to recognize they also have a larger social responsibility to the public welfare, and prescribe methadone with care and caution.ReferencesFoley KM. Opioids and chronic neuropathic pain. NEJM. 2003; 348:1279-1281.Morley JS, et al. Low-dose methadone has an analgesic effect in neuropathic pain: a double-blind randomized controlled crossover trial. Pall Med. 2003; 17:576-587.Altier N, et al. Management of chronic neuropathic pain with methadone: a review of 13 cases. Clin J Pain. 2005; 21:364-369.Gagnon B, et al. Methadone in the treatment of neuropathic pain. Pain Res Manage. 2003; 8:149-154.Moulin DE, et al. Methadone in the management of intractable neuropathic non cancer pain. Can J Neuro Sci. 2005; 32:340-343.Nichloson AB. Methadone for cancer pain: Review. Cochrane Database of systematic reviews. 2004;2:CD003971.Google Search: ‘Methadone deaths.’ December 2007.Finn S, Tuckwiller S. Feds act on methadone deaths. West Virginia Gazette. July 23 2006.Increase in poisoning deaths caused by non-illicit drugs--Utah, 1991-2003. MMWR Weekly. 2005; 54:33-36.US Department of Health and Human Services – Division on Pharmacologic Therapies. Report on Methadone Mortality (http://dpt.samhsa.gov/reports/methodone_mortality-05.htm - no longer publicly available). Updated Report available at: http://www.dpt.samhsa.gov/pdf/MethadoneBackgroundPaper_72007_2_.htm.ACGME Competencies: Medical Knowledge, Patient CareKeyword(s): Pain – Opioids
#172 Professional Patient Boundries in Palliative CareAuthor(s): Lise Taylor Barbour MDBackground Boundaries in patient care are “mutually understood, unspoken, physical and emotional limits of the relationship between the trusting patient and the caring physician or provider” (Farber 1997). Health professional boundaries represent a set of culturally and professionally derived rules for how health professionals and their patients interact. Boundaries serve to establish and maintain a trusting provider-patient relationship and help clinicians maintain “justice and equity in dealing with all of their patients”, not only a special few (Spence 2005). This Fast Fact reviews issues in health professional-patient boundaries in palliative care.Causes of Boundary Problems In caring for seriously ill or dying patients it is common for strong emotional bonds to develop. However, when the limits of the provider-patient/family relationship are not clear or where normal professional boundaries are not respected, problems are likely to arise. Common reasons for boundary problems include:Personality styles or psychiatric disorders in which normal boundaries are not recognized or respected.Health professional stress/burnout (seeFast Facts #167-170).Cultural misunderstandings.Examples Warning signs and examples of potential boundary blurring include:Gift giving from/to patient/family.Patients having or wanting access to provider’s home phone number, or other personal information.Patient/family expectations that the provider will provide care or socialize outside of clinical care settings.Patient/family requests that the provider participate in prayer (SeeFast Facts #120 ).The health care provider revealing excessive personal information with patient/family.Self-Monitoring Not all ‘boundary issues’ are detrimental to the provider-patient relationship – some clearly enhance compassionate care and serve to reinforce a trusting therapeutic relationship. However, it is important for the provider to self-reflect when boundaries are approached.Am I treating this patient or family differently than I do my other patients? What emotions of my own does this patient/family trigger and are the emotions impacting my clinical decision-making? Are my actions truly therapeutic for the patient, or am I acting in a manner to meet my personal needs? Would I be comfortable if this gift/action was known to the public or my colleagues? Could this boundary issue represent a sign that I am experiencing professional burnout? Managing boundary concernsSet clear expectations with patients and families as to your role in the context of their care, your availability and best ways to communicate with you.Use professional colleagues or a mental health professional as a sounding board when you are uncertain about your own or your patient/family behaviors.Address issues as they arise with the patient/family. Acknowledge importance of feelings, emphasize the provider-patient relationship and the importance of maintaining objectivity; emphasize that the rejection of a requested behavior does not imply a lack of caring.Seek professional counseling for yourself or the patient/family when boundary issues impact your ability to provide objective, compassionate care.ReferencesGabbard GO, Nadelson C. Professional boundaries in the physician-patient relationship. JAMA. 1995; 273:1445-1449.Farber N, Novak D, O’Brien M. Love, boundaries, and the physician-patient relationship. Arch Int Med. 1997;157:2291-2294.Elder W. Erotic undercurrents and boundary violations in medical care. Clin Fam Prac. 2004; 6:975-82.Spence S. Patients bearing gifts: are there strings attached? BMJ. 2005; 331:1527-1529.Post S, Puchalski C, Larson D. Physicians and patient spirituality: professional boundaries, competency, and ethics. Ann Internal Med. 2000; 132:578-583.ACGME Competencies: Interpersonal and Communications Skills, ProfessionalismKeyword(s): Communication, Ethics, Law, Policy Health Systems, Psychosocial and Spiritual Experience: Patients, Families, and Clinicians
#173 Cancer Related FatigueAuthor(s): Gary M Reisfield MD and George R Wilson MDBackground While several recent studies have found fatigue to be the single most prevalent, severe, and disabling symptom in cancer patients – exceeding even pain – it remains both underrecognized and poorly treated by physicians (1). This Fast Fact reviews diagnostic and treatment approaches in the palliative care setting.Characteristics of Fatigue Cancer-related fatigue (CRF) is a persistent sense of tiredness/diminished energy related to cancer and/or its treatment, which is not relieved by rest, and which causes diminution in functional capacity and quality of life. Additional proposed ICD-10 features include: diminished concentration; diminished motivation; insomnia or hypersomnia; nonrestorative sleep; short-term memory deficits, and marked emotional reactivity to fatigue that are not primarily consequences of depression (2).Causes CRF is often multifactorial, with biochemical, physiological, psychological, and behavioral dimensions that remain poorly defined. Assessment is aimed at identifying correctable causes and determining the impact of CRF on both patients and caregivers. Common causes of CRF include:Direct effect from cancer and/or treatmentsSedating medicationsDeconditioningPsychiatric co-morbidities (e.g. depression, anxiety)Hypoxemia, or severe anemia (Hb ≤8 g/dL) and possibly moderate anemia (Hb ≤11g/dL)Systemic infection and/or or significant organ dysfunction (e.g. heart, liver, kidney, lung)Electrolyte abnormalities (e.g. ↓Na+, ↓K+, ↓Mg++ , ↑Ca++)Nutritional imbalance/impairmentSleep disturbanceUncontrolled painSpecific Treatments Treatment should be directed toward correcting identifiable causes, e.g. elimination of sedating drugs, correction of anemia or electrolyte imbalance.Non-Specific Treatments Nonspecific treatments may be helpful in reducing fatigue, optimizing function, and promoting adaptation.Education: Educate patient/family about CRF in order to normalize the symptom and promote adaptation/adjustment through setting realistic goals; modifying and prioritizing activities; and planning activities around diurnal variations in energy levels.Exercise: Several randomized controlled trials showed benefit of exercise in managing fatigue in patients undergoing active antineoplastic treatment (3). Aerobic exercise (low to moderate intensity; progressive) is ideal, but benefits may be realized with resistance training. A reasonable goal is 20-30 minutes of (cumulative) exercise per day, 4-5 days per week.Drug Therapy: There is little good data for non-specific drug therapy in CRF. The following drugs have been used with variable success: Psychostimulants: While there is a growing literature on the use of psychostimulants for CRF, there is a lack of good controlled trails. Methylphenidate: small studies have shown some efficacy in CRF, but a recent RCT of methylphenidate, 5 mg po q2h prn (maximum dose: 20 mg/d) showed no difference from placebo at one week (4). Start with 2.5-5 mg and titrate as necessary to 15-30 mg po at 08:00 and noon. Modafanil: pilot studies indicate efficacy in the treatment of fatigue associated with depression, MS, ALS, and HIV. Potentially fewer side effects than other psychostimulants. Start with 50 mg po qam and titrate as necessary to 200-400 mg po qam.Corticosteroids: These may provide a modest duration of benefit (2-4 weeks) offset by the potential for significant toxicity. Reported regimens have included prednisone 7.5-10 mg po qd; dexamethasone 1-2 mg po qd; methylprednisolone 32 mg po qd.Megestrol acetate: Two double-blind, crossover studies showed reduction in CRF with doses of 160 mg po tid (5,6). ReferencesMorrow GR, Shelke AR, Roscoe JA. Management of cancer-related fatigue. Cancer Investigation. 2005; 23:229-239.Fatigue PDQ. National Cancer Institute. Available at: www.cancer.gov/cancertopics/pdq/supportivecare/fatigue.Mock V. Evidence-based treatment of cancer-related fatigue. J Natl Cancer Inst Monogr. 2004; 32:112-118.Bruera E, Valero V, Driver L, et al. Patient-controlled methylphenidate for cancer fatigue: a double-blind, randomized, placebo-controlled trial. J Clin Oncol. 2006; 24:2073-2078.Bruera E, Macmillan K, Hanson J, et al. A controlled trial of megestrol acetate on appetite, caloric intake, nutritional status, and other symptoms in patients with advanced cancer. Cancer. 1990; 66:1279-1282.Bruera E, Ernst S, Hagen N, et al. Effectiveness of megestrol acetate in patients with advanced cancer: a randomized, double-blind, crossover study. Cancer Prev Control 1998; 2:74-78.ACGME Competencies: Medical Knowledge, Patient CareKeyword(s): Non-Pain Symptoms and Syndromes
#174 Dementia Medications in Palliative CareAuthor(s): Laura J Morrison MD and Solomon Liao MDBackground In the past ten years new drugs have been marketed to delay the progression of dementia. No studies have addressed when or if these drugs should be stopped as cognitive and functional decline progress. Palliative care professionals are frequently asked about the continued role of these drugs in the face of functional decline and short prognosis. This Fast Fact will suggest guidelines for continued use or discontinuation in the hospice/palliative care setting.Medications:Cholinesterase Inhibitors (ChEIs): e.g. galantamine, donepezil, rivastigmineIndication: mild to moderate dementia—usually started as first line agents. Evidence: A 2005 meta-analysis has called into question the degree of benefit, if any, of ChEIs even in mild to moderate dementia (1), and expert opinions vary widely on the clinical significance of reported positive outcomes from earlier studies on ChEIs. Few studies have looked at efficacy in moderate to severe dementia. Some studies have suggested ChEIs have a role in controlling behavior problems (2) and lessening opioid related somnolence (3). One study suggested a potential precipitous cognitive decline if ChEIs are stopped suddenly (4). Cost: ~$129-135/month (average wholesale price). Side Effects: diarrhea, nausea, anorexia, insomnia, bradycardia.N-methyl-D-aspartate (NMDA) receptor antagonist: memantine.Indication: moderate to severe dementia. Evidence: Studies suggest a modest beneficial effect with decreased cognitive and functional decline in patients with moderate to severe dementia. Again, the clinical significance for patients is debated. Cost: $136/month at 10mg twice daily (average wholesale price). Side Effects: dizziness, headache, constipation.Recommendations:Use a shared decision-making model with patients/surrogates guided by the goals of care (e.g. life prolongation and/or symptom relief), carefully weighing the expected benefits and burdens (see reference 5 for specific guidance on medication appropriateness late in life). Be prepared to make a clear recommendation based on best available evidence. Due to the advanced status of many dementia patients entering hospice or being seen by palliative care programs, it’s reasonable to recommend stopping ChEIs and memantine, as the evidence for their benefit is marginal at best. These medications may be viewed as prolonging a poor quality of life and/or the process of dying.If there is uncertainty, consider a time-limited trial of medication continuation or discontinuation, with serial reassessment of target cognitive or behavioral indicators. Families should be made aware that a decline following discontinuation may not be reversible.In the case of a patient with dementia-related behavior problems, clinicians or family may feel that medications play an important role in lessening the behaviors; continuing medications may be reasonable. Alternatively, using non-pharmacologic strategies and/or increasing or starting an antipsychotic can often help control behavior problems without the use of ChEls or memantine.When the decision is made to stop a medication, common geriatrics wisdom supports a gradual dose taper rather than abrupt discontinuation.Clinicians should inform all involved healthcare team members of a recommendation to discontinue medication along with the rationale for discontinuation (6).Working with Families The reaction of families to a discussion of discontinuing these drugs is often emotional and may be a source of tension between family members. Some will view these medications as a final hope for prolonged life or improved function and will resist discontinuation. For others, permission to let go, to accept impending death and remove a perceived burden of cost and daily pill taking, will be welcomed. Clinicians can best help families by focusing discussion around the overall goals of care (seeFast Facts #29 ,65 ).ReferencesKaduszkiewicz H, Zimmerman T, Beck-Bornholdt H-P, van den Bussche H. Cholinesterase inhibitors for patients with Alzheimer’s disease: systematic review of randomized clinical trials. BMJ. 2005; 331:321-27.Wynn ZJ, Cummings JL. Cholinesterase inhibitor therapies and neuropsychiatric manifestations of Alzheimer's disease. Dement Geriatr Cogn Disord. 2004; 17(1-2):100-8.Slatkin NE, Rhiner M. Treatment of opiate-related sedation: utility of the cholinesterase inhibitors. J Support Oncol. 2003; 1(1):53-63.Minett TS, Thomas A, Wilkinson LM, Daniel SL, Sanders J. Richardson J, Littlewood E, Myint P, Newby J, McKeith IG. What happens when donepezil is suddenly withdrawn? An open label trial in dementia with Lewy bodies and Parkinson’s disease with dementia. Int J Geriatr Psychiatry. 2003; 18(11):988-93.Holmes HM, Hayley DC, Alexander GC, Sachs GA. Reconsidering medication appropriateness for patients late in life. Arch Intern Med. 2006;166(6):605-9.Gwyther LP, Weinberg AD. Discontinuing medications for a resident with advanced Alzheimer’s disease. Ann Long-Term Care. 2006:14(5):46-8. ACGME Competencies: Patient Care, Interpersonal and Communication SkillsKeyword(s): Non-Pain Symptoms and Syndromes
#175 Opioid Allergic ReactionsAuthor(s): Hunter E Woodall MD, Asriani Chiu MD, and David E Weissman MDBackground Patient reports of opioid “allergies” are common, most often due to symptoms of nausea, vomiting, itching, hypotension, or constipation. This Fast Fact will review signs, symptoms, and management options of opioid allergies and pseudo-allergies. Allergies can be defined as anexaggerated immune reaction to an antigen. There are different types of allergic, or hypersensitivity, reactions (immediate, cytotoxic, immune complex, or delayed), but the common feature is that all such reactions aremediated by the immune system . In contrast, the vast majority of opioid side effects are not immune related. Opioid side effects can be divided into three categories: those that have no element of an immune reaction, those that mimic an immune reaction, and those that are immune mediated.Side effects with no immune mechanism: these include nausea/vomiting, constipation sedation, delirium, respiratory depression, and urinary retention.Side effects that mimic immune reactions: common signs/symptoms include mild itching, uticaria, brochospasm, or hypotension.Note: if all these occur soon after an opioid dose, and the patient appears acutely ill, this may represent an anaphylactoid reaction (see below). For most patients, these symptoms are mild and self-limited. The etiology most commonly involves direct mast cell degranulation with histamine release, unrelated to a true immune-mediated reaction. Such reactions to opioids are usually idiosyncratic and may or may not recur with re-challenge of the same opioid; they are not a contraindication to continued opioid use, since an alternative opioid may be well tolerated. Hypotension can also occur due to arterial and venous vasodilation, thus, hypotension is more common in a volume depleted patient. Opioids can also have negative inotropic effects and induce a vagally-mediated bradycardia leading to hypotension – again, not a true allergic reaction.Immune mediated reactions:Allergic dermatitis in response to opioids has been described. It is characterized as erythroderma, scarlatina, eczema, or exudative vesicular eruptions; these may represent a Type IV (delayed) hypersensitivity reaction. Patients can undergo diagnostic patch testing for confirmation.Anaphylaxis/Anaphylactoid Reactions. Anaphylaxis is a systemic IgE mediated reaction resulting in the immediate release of potent mediators; anaphylactoid reactions are clinically the same, but not IgE mediated. Early symptoms include nasal congestion, flushing, pruritus, angioedema; if the process worsens, patients can develop nausea, diarrhea, urinary urgency, brochospasm, hypotension, and death. Opioids can lead to an anaphylactoid reaction, but such events are very rare.Management True allergic reactions appear to be very rare. If you suspect an immune-mediated skin rash you should consult with a dermatologist or allergist to establish a definitive diagnosis and determine the need for desensitization, or to help identify appropriate alternatives. Anaphylactoid reactions require emergent management with epinephrine and histamine blockers. For milder histamine-related symptoms, common practice is to rotate to an opioid in a different pharmacologic class (see below) along with use of anti-histamines or steroids. Anecdotal reports suggest that methadone and fentanyl cause fewer instances of itching. Opioid Class Drugs Phenanthrenesmorphine, codeine, hydrocodone, oxycodone, oxymorphone,hydromorphone, levoraphanolPhenylpiperadinesfentanyl, meperidine, sufentanil, remifentaylDiphenylheptanesmethadone, propoxyphene ReferencesGilbar PJ, Ridge AM. Inappropriate labeling of patients as opioid allergic. J Oncol Pharmacy Practice. 2004; 10:177-182.VanArsdel PP, Jr. Pseudoallergic drug reactions. Introduction and general review. Immunol Allergy Clin NA. 1991; 11:635-44.Erush SC. Narcotic allergy. P&T. 1996; 21:250-2, 292.Fisher MM, Harle DG, Baldo BA. Anaphylactoid reactions to narcotic analgesics. Clin Rev Allergy. 1991; 9:309-18.Hermens JM. Comparison of histamine release in human skin mast cells induced by morphine, fentanyl, and oxymorphone. Anesthesiology. 1985; 62(2):124-9.Kroigaard M, Garvey LH, Menne T, Husum B. Allergic reactions in anaesthesia: are suspected causes confirmed on subsequent testing? Br J Anesth. 2005; 95(4):468-71.Tcheurekdjian H, Gundling K Continuous hydromrphone infusion for opioid intolerance. J Allergy Clin Immunol. 2006; 118:282-4Joint Council of Allergy Asthma and Immunology. Practice parameters for drug hypersensitivity. Ann All Asthma Immunol. 1999; 83:S665-700.ACGME Competencies: Medical KnowledgeKeyword(s): Pain – Opioids
#176 Evaluation of Malignant AscitesAuthor(s): Karen LeBlanc and Robert Arnold MDBackground Malignant ascites is the accumulation of abdominal fluid due to the direct effects of cancer. This Fast Fact reviews the causes and diagnosis of malignant ascites.Fast Fact #177 will review its treatment.Pathophysiology The pathophysiology of malignant ascites is incompletely understood. Contributing mechanisms include tumor-related obstruction of lymphatic drainage, increased vascular permeability, over-activation of the renin-angiotensin-aldosterone system, neoplastic fluid production, and production of metalloproteinases that degrade the extracellular matrix. Portal venous compression can also occur from metastatic invasion of the liver, leading to peritoneal fluid accumulation.Natural History The most common cancers associated with ascites are adenocarcinomas of the ovary, breast, colon, stomach and pancreas. Median survival after diagnosis of malignant ascites is in the range of 1-4 months; survival is apt to be longer for ovarian and breast cancers if systemic anti-cancer treatments are available.Presentation and Diagnostics Symptoms include abdominal distension, nausea, vomiting, early satiety, dyspnea, lower extremity edema, weight gain, and reduced mobility. Physical exam findings may include abdominal distention, bulging flanks, shifting dullness, and a fluid wave. Plain abdominal x-rays are not specific, but may show a hazy or a “ground glass” appearance. Ultrasound or CT scanning can confirm the presence of ascites and also demonstrate if the fluid is loculated in discrete areas of the peritoneal cavity. There are many potential causes of ascites in the cancer patient: peritoneal carcinomatosis, malignant obstruction of draining lymphatics, portal vein thrombosis, elevated portal venous pressure from cirrhosis, congestive heart failure, constrictive pericarditis, nephrotic syndrome, and peritoneal infections. Depending on the clinical presentation and expected survival, a diagnostic evaluation is usually indicated as it will impact both prognosis and treatment approach. Key tests include the serum albumin and protein level and a simultaneous diagnostic paracentesis, checking ascitic fluid white blood cell count, albumin, protein, and cytology.Classification The old classification of exudative versus transudative ascites has been updated through the use of the serum-ascites albumin gradient (SAAG).SAAG = (the serum albumin concentration) – (ascitic fluid albumin concentration). A SAAG > 1.1 g/dl indicates ascites due to, at least in part, increased portal pressures, with an accuracy of 97%. This is most commonly seen in patients with cirrhosis, hepatic congestion, CHF, or portal vein thrombosis. A SAAG < 1.1 g/dl indicates no portal hypertension, with an accuracy of 97%; most commonly seen in peritoneal carcinomatosis, an infectious process of the peritoneum, nephrotic syndrome, or malnutrition/hypoalbuminemia. Cytological evaluation is approximately 97% sensitive in cases of peritoneal carcinomatosis, but is not helpful in the detection of other types of malignant ascites due to massive hepatic metastasis or malignant obstruction of lymph vessels.ReferencesThomas J, von Gunten CF. Diagnosis and Management of Ascites. In: Berger AM, Von Roenn J, Schuster J, eds. Principles and Practice of Palliative Care and Supportive Oncology. 3rd edition. Philadelphia, PA: Lippincott, Williams & Wilkins; 2006.Adam RA, Adam YG. Malignant ascites: past, present, and future. J Am Coll Surg. 2004; 198:999-1011.Spratt JS, Edwards M, Kubota T, et al. Peritoneal carcinomatosis: anatomy, physiology, diagnosis, management. Current Problems in Cancer. 1986; 10:553-584.Becker G. Galandi D. Blum HE. Malignant ascites: systematic review and guideline for treatment. Eu J Cancer. 2006; 42:589-97.Aslam N, Marino CR. Malignant ascites: new concepts in Pathophysiology, diagnosis, and management. Arch Int Med. 2001; 161:2733-7.ACGME Competencies: Medical KnowledgeKeyword(s): Non-Pain Symptoms and Syndromes
#177 Palliative Treatment of Malignant AscitesAuthor(s): Karen LeBlanc and Robert Arnold MDBackground The natural history, presenting signs/symptoms, and diagnostic approach to the patient with malignant ascites are discussed inFast Fact #176 ; readers are encouraged to read this Fast Fact to review the important role of determining the Serum Ascites-Albumin Gradient as a diagnostic and treatment aid. This Fast Fact will review treatment approaches. Diuretics: Malignant ascites (SAAG < 1.1) generally does not respond to diuretic treatment although no randomized trials have been completed. Patients with evidence of portal hypertension (SAAG > 1.1) are more likely to respond to diuretics. Paracentesis: Paracentesis can provide immediate relief of symptoms in up to 90% of patients. Drainage of uncomplicated large-volume ascites (4-6 L/session) can be done safely and quickly in the outpatient setting—including the home—or at the hospital bedside; ultrasound guidance is necessary only when there is loculated fluid. Drainage catheters: For patients who require frequent paracentesis, external drainage catheters placed through the abdominal wall allow frequent or continuous drainage of ascites fluid without repetitive needle insertions. Patients or caretakers may perform the drainage, reducing visits to medical clinics. Several types of catheters are available:Pigtail Catheter: A simple, temporary all-purpose catheter; prone to complications when used over an extended duration (peritonitis, accidental removal, leakage, occlusion). Tunneled Catheter: A catheter that prevents infection by promoting scarring around an antibiotic-impregnated Dacron cuff in subcutaneous tissue. Used conventionally for peritoneal dialysis, it is placed with ultrasound or fluoroscopic guidance and has lower risks of infection and leakage than the pigtail catheter. Complications are reduced by daily drainage for the first two weeks of cuff healing. The Pleurx catheter is FDA approved for malignant ascites and features a one-way rubber valve to prevent leaks between draining sessions. Tunneled catheters are used in patients with life expectancy of at least one month. Vascular Shunts:Peritovenous shunt (PVS) systems are designed to channel peritoneal fluid and proteins in benign ascites back into the circulation via the superior vena cava. PVS has not been shown to have clinically significant risk of disseminating tumor cells in malignant ascites. A PVS is placed by interventional radiology under conscious sedation, and patients typically require 24 hours of monitoring with a central venous line after the procedure. The best response to PVS (only about 50%) is in ovarian and breast cancers. PVS is recommended only in patients with a life expectancy of one to three months. Transjugular Intrahepatic Portosystemic Shunt (TIPS) is a shunt between the portal vein and hepatic vein, designed to reduce portal hypertension and improve sodium balance. Most patients with malignant ascites do not have portal hypertension although TIPS might be helpful in the occasional cancer with evidence of increased portal pressures (SAAG > 1.1). ReferencesThomas J, von Gunten CF. Diagnosis and Management of Ascites. In: Berger AM, Von Roenn J, Schuster J. Principles and Practice of Palliative Care and Supportive Oncology. 3rd edition. Philadelphia, PA: Lippincott, Williams & Wilkins; 2006.Adam RA, Adam YG. Malignant ascites: past, present, and future. J Am Coll Surg. 2004; 198:999-1011.Spratt JS, Edwards M, Kubota T, et al. Peritoneal carcinomatosis: anatomy, physiology, diagnosis, management. Current Problems in Cancer. 1986; 10:553-584.Becker G, Galandi D, Blum HE. Malignant ascites: systematic review and guideline for treatment. Eu J Cancer. 2006; 42:589-97.Aslam N, Marino CR. Malignant ascites: new concepts in pathophysiology, diagnosis, and management. Arch Int Med 2001;161:2733-7.Smith EM, Jayson GC. The current and future management of malignant ascites. Clinical Oncology. 2003; 15:59-72.Pockros PJ, Esrason KT, Nguyen C, Duque J, Woods S. Mobilization of malignant ascites with diuretics is dependent on ascitic fluid characteristics. Gastroenterology. 1992; 103:1302-1306.Abeloff M, Armitage J, Niederhuber J, Kastan M, McKenna WG, eds. Clinical Oncology. 3rd edition. New York, NY: Churchill Livingstone; 2004: 1199-1205.Covey AM. Management of malignant pleural effusions and ascites. J Support Oncol.. 2005; 3:169-73.ACGME Competencies: Medical KnowledgeKeyword(s): Non-Pain Symptoms and Syndromes
#178 The National Polst Paradigm Initiative, 2nd EditionAuthor(s): Judy Citko, JD, Alvin H Moss MD, Margaret Carley RN, JD, and Susan Tolle MDBackground One barrier in the treatment of seriously-ill and dying patients has been the inability to develop a system by which a patient’s preferences for life-sustaining treatment are both documented and honored across different care sites. Regional and statewide programs have tackled this problem with variable success. Originally started in Oregon in 1991, the Physician Orders for Life Sustaining Treatment (POLST) Program creates a coordinated system for eliciting, documenting, and communicating the life-sustaining treatment wishes of seriously-ill patients. Programs with the essential core elements of POLST are developing in the majority of states. Although different states use different names, the program is universally referred to as the POLST Paradigm Program. ThisFast Fact will review key elements of the POLST Paradigm Program.The Paradigm The POLST Paradigm was developed as a standardized, advance care planning document to be completed by health care professionals, together with a patient or surrogate decision-maker. The POLST form translates the values expressed in an advance directive into immediately activemedical orders which do not require interpretation or further activation. POLST aims to provide continuity of care for patients according to their preferences across all care settings (e.g. hospitals, hospice, long-term care and home), and is transferred with the patient throughout the health care system. In each region or state, local leaders have presented widespread education to support its application across the spectrum of health care settings.The Form The form is brightly colored to facilitate identification and is divided into several sections: CPR decision : Resuscitate or Do Not Resuscitate (DNR).Medical intervention decisions : comfort measures vs. limited additional interventions vs. full treatment.Medically administered nutrition : none vs. defined trial period vs. long-term use.Health care professional signature : patient/surrogate signature is strongly recommended or required, depending on the state or region. How It Works POLST is designed for seriously-ill patients, or those who are medically frail, regardless of their age. Completion of the POLST form is voluntary. The health care professional turns the patient's values (expressed personally through conversation, and/or an advance directive, or by the patient's legal representative if the patient lacks decision-making capacity) into actionable medical orders. The orders are valid when signed by a physician (or NP/PA depending on individual state regulations). Many state/regional POLST programs also require the patient’s or legal agent’s signature to make the form valid. A copy of the POLST form is included in the medical record while the original remains with the patient as they move across settings of care.Effectiveness Data from completed research projects related to POLST are available on the POLST website ( www.polst.org ). Key findings indicate that patients’ values are accurately reflected in the orders, that the orders are followed by first responders, that life-sustaining treatment orders beyond CPR (e.g. artificial nutrition) are useful to guide care consistent with the patient’s wishes, and that implementation can evolve to become a standard of care in a community, region, or state. State/Regional Initiatives Numerous communities and states are developing or have implemented programs similar to Oregon’s with the guidance of the National POLST Paradigm Task Force. The names of endorsed programs include: Medical Orders for Life Sustaining Treatment or MOLST (New York); Medical Orders for Scope of Treatment or MOST (North Carolina); POLST (California, Hawaii, Oregon, Wisconsin, Washington state); and Physician Orders for Scope of Treatment or POST (West Virginia, Tennessee).Resources The POLST website has: sample downloadable forms, educational materials and videos; a map of states and regions using the form, along with contact information; a description of the core elements of a POLST Paradigm Program; and information on how to build a coalition of health care professionals to start a POLST Paradigm Program. A sample of most materials is available at no cost to help facilitate development of other POLST paradigm programs. There may be a low cost for larger orders to help cover expenses of a state or regional program’s coordinating center. The Center for Ethics in Health Care at Oregon Health & Science University coordinates the national initiative.References 1.Physician Orders for Life-Sustaining Treatment Paradigm. Available at:http://www.polst.org .Tolle SW, Tilden VP, Dunn P, Nelson C. A prospective study of the efficacy of the physician orders for life sustaining treatment.J Amer Ger Soc . 1998; 46:1097-1102. Hickman SE, Hammes BJ, Moss AH, & Tolle SW. Hope for the future: achieving the original intent of advance directives.The Hastings Center Report Special Report . 2005; 35(6—Suppl):S26-S30. 4.Hickman SE, Nelson CA, Perrin NA, Moss AH, Hammes BJ, Tolle SW. A comparison of methods to communicate treatment preferences in nursing facilities: traditional practices versus the physician orders for life-sustaining treatment program.J Amer Ger Soc . 2010; 58:1241-1248.Author Affiliations: Coalition for Compassionate Care, Sacramento CA (JC); West Virginia University, Morgantown, WV (AHM); Oregon Health & Science University, Portland, OR (MC, ST).ACGME Competencies: Systems Based PracticeKeyword(s): Ethics, Law, Policy Health Systems
#179 CPR Survival in the Hospital SettingAuthor(s): David H Ramenofsky and David E Weissman MDBackground Survival to discharge following cardiac arrest occurring in the hospital is infrequent. This Fast Fact will review data on CPR outcomes in hospitalized patients.The largest and most comprehensive source of in-hospital CPR outcomes data is the National Registry of Cardiopulmonary Resuscitation, reporting 14,720 resuscitation attempts (2000-2002) in adults from 207 U.S. hospitals (1). A uniform case inclusion definition was used which included both cardiac and respiratory arrests requiring an emergency response from hospital personnel. Survival 20 minutes after CPR was 44%, but only 17% of all CPR patients survived to discharge. The survival to discharge for ventricular fibrillation and pulseless ventricular tachycardia was 34% and 35%, respectively, but only 10% for asystole and pulseless electrical activity.Pre-CPR, 84% of patients came from home. Among survivors, 51% returned home, the remainder being discharged to another hospital, a rehabilitation facility, or a nursing home. Two percent were discharged to hospice care.Neurological function of survivors was assessed using a five point scale (1 = good performance to 5 = brain death). Pre-CPR, 68% were in category 1, falling to 59% at discharge. In other words, 86% of category 1 patients remained at this level if they survived CPR, whereas 14% had neurological decline.Overall functional performance was assessed using a similar five point scale (1 = good to 5 = brain death). Overall performance declined: 49% of survivors were category 1 pre-CPR compared to only 37% after CPR, a 25% decline in overall function. A meta-analysis of CPR outcomes was reported in 1998; it included data from 49 research publications after 1980, totaling 9,838 patients (2).Depending on the rigor of CPR event definition, immediate survival was 41-44% and survival to discharge was 13-15%.Only five studies reported discharge information. Of these, 73 of 93 patients (78%) returned to their home.Factors predicting survival to discharge included myocardial infarction, coronary heart disease, and hypertension.Factors which predicted a failure to survive to discharge included: Sepsis the day prior to the CPR eventSerum creatinine >1.5 mg/dlMetastatic cancerBeing African-American (this risk factor has subsequently been challenged – see Reference 3)DementiaDependent status Historically, the CPR success rate in cancer patients has been thought to be less than 2%. A recent meta-analysis reviewed 42 studies from 1966-2005. Since 1990, 6.7% of cancer patients (localized: 9.1%; metastatic: 7.8%) survived CPR to discharge (4). Survival to discharge for ward patients was better than ICU patients: 10.1% vs.2.2%. Data on neurological outcome were not included.Renal dialysis patients: 3 studies have looked at CPR outcomes in a total of 137 dialysis patients. Survival to discharge was seen in 14% of patients. One study examined long-term survival: of 74 patients undergoing CPR, only 2 (3%) survived six months (vs. 9% of non-dialysis controls) (5).Summary CPR for hospitalized patients is associated with poor outcomes, as the cause of arrest is usually associated with advanced chronic illness rather than an easily reversible acute cardio-pulmonary event (e.g. isolated arrhythmia). When talking with patients about CPR, physicians can say roughly 15%, or 1 in 6 patients, who undergo CPR in the hospital may survive to discharge. However, specific co-morbidities will reduce the chance of survival, and surviving patients are at risk for a range of CPR-related complications including permanent neurological and functional impairment.ReferencesPeberdy MA, Kaye W, Ornato JP, et al. Cardiopulmonary resuscitation of adults in the hospital: A report of 14,720 cardiac arrests from the National Registry of Cardiopulmonary Resuscitation. Resuscitation. 2003; 58 297-308.Ebell MH, et al. Survival after in-hospital cardiopulmonary resuscitation: a meta-analysis. J Gen Int Med. 1998; 13(12):805-16.Zafari AM, Zarter SK, Heggen V, et al. A program encouraging early defibrillation results in improved in-hospital resuscitation efficacy. J Am Coll Cardiol. 2004; 44(4):846-852.Reisfield GM, et al. Survival in cancer patients undergoing in-hospital cardiopulmonary resuscitation: a meta-analysis. Resuscitation. 2006; 71:152-160.Hijazi F, Holley JL. Cardiopulmonary resuscitation and dialysis: outcome and patients' views. Seminars in Dialysis. 2003; 16(1):51-53.ACGME Competencies: Medical KnowledgeKeyword(s): Prognosis
#180 Parenteral Lidocaine for Neuropathic PainAuthor(s): Jay Thomas MD, PhDBackground In recent years reports have described the use of parenteral lidocaine for neuropathic pain. This Fast Fact reviews the use of parenteral lidocaine for neuropathic pain.Mechanism Lidocaine is a local anesthetic that is a nonselective sodium channel blocker. Sodium channel blockade is thought to be responsible for analgesia. Studies in animals and humans demonstrate that injured nerves develop abnormal, spontaneously active sodium channels at sites of nerve injury, along damaged nerves, and at the dorsal root ganglia of damaged nerves. Lidocaine can suppress this ectopic, spontaneous firing of aberrant sodium channels at concentrations that do not affect normal nerve or cardiac conduction1 .Clinical Trial DataSmall controlled studies have established systemic lidocaine to be effective in the relief of diabetic neuropathy and post-herpetic neuralgia2, 3 .A meta-analysis concluded that systemic lidocaine is superior to placebo for neuropathic pain, is as effective as other adjuvant analgesics, and is well tolerated4 .Two small controlled trials in cancer pain found no benefit of systemic lidocaine5, 6 . However, other case reports and one retrospective study support its use7 .One trial indicated that an analgesic response to lidocaine is a predictor of a successful response to mexiletene, an oral congener of lidocaine8 . In practice, the validity of this finding has been questioned, and a high rate of side effects (predominantly gastrointestinal) from mexiletene have limited its use.DosingMultiple regimens have been described.Typically a bolus dose between 1-5 mg/kg is administered intravenously over 15 to 60 minutes depending on the dose.Time to analgesia has been reported from being between 1-45 minutes9 .If patients respond to initial bolus, ongoing IV or subcutaneous infusions can be provided over days to months depending on response.Serum lidocaine levels should be followed at steady state (t½ ~100 minutes, so 3-5 half-lives for steady state ~5-8 hrs) and intermittently afterwards as clinically indicated. A target level of 2-5 mg/liter is based on dose-response studies and avoidance of side effects as below9 .Adverse Reactions Lidocaine has dose-related side effects that become progressively more severe at levels higher than 5 mg/liter, including myoclonus (~8 mg/l), seizures (>10 mg/l), and cardiovascular collapse (>25 mg/l)10 . Although lidocaine after a myocardial infarction has been associated with a trend towards increased risk of arrhythmias, cardiac monitoring during studies of normal volunteers and patients has noted no cardiac risks at clinically appropriate levels. Lidocaine is rapidly and extensively metabolized by the liver. Metabolites are excreted by the kidney, thus adjustments may be needed in the case of liver and renal insufficiency, guided by monitoring steady state blood levels.Summary There is weak, largely non-controlled evidence that systemic lidocaine can relieve neuropathic pain in selected patients. Definitive evidence to support its use in cancer pain (both neuropathic and opioid-refractory) awaits further prospective trials. Most practitioners, however, would not use it as a first line treatment and a pain or palliative care consult should precede its use.ReferencesDevor M, Wall PD, Catalan N. Systemic lidocaine silences ectopic neuroma and DRG discharge without blocking nerve conduction. Pain. 1992; 48(2):261-8.Kastrup J, Petersen P, Dejgard A, Angelo HR, Hilsted J. Intravenous lidocaine infusion--a new treatment of chronic painful diabetic neuropathy? Pain. 1987; 28(1):69-75.Rowbotham MC, Reisner-Keller LA, Fields HL. Both intravenous lidocaine and morphine reduce the pain of postherpetic neuralgia. Neurology. 1991; 41(7):1024-8.Challapalli V, Tremont-Lukats IW, McNicol ED, Lau J, Carr DB. Cochrane Database of Systematic Reviews 2005, Issue 4. Art. No.: CD003345. DOI: 10.1002/14651858.CD003345.pub2.Ellemann K, Sjogren P, Banning AM, Jensen TS, Smith T, Geertsen P. Trial of intravenous lidocaine on painful neuropathy in cancer patients. Clin J Pain. 1989; 5(4):291-4.Bruera E, Ripamonti C, Brenneis C, Macmillan K, Hanson J. A randomized double-blind crossover trial of intravenous lidocaine in the treatment of neuropathic cancer pain. J Pain Symptom Manage. 1992; 7(3):138-40.Thomas J, Kronenberg R, Cox MC, Naco GC, Wallace M, von Gunten CF. Intravenous lidocaine relieves severe pain: results of an inpatient hospice chart review. J Palliat Med. 2004; 7(5):660-7.Galer BS, Harle J, Rowbotham MC. Response to intravenous lidocaine infusion predicts subsequent response to oral mexiletine: a prospective study. J Pain Symptom Manage. 1996; 12(3):161-7.Ferrante FM, Paggioli J, Cherukuri S, Arthur GR. The analgesic response to intravenous lidocaine in the treatment of neuropathic pain. Anesth Analg. 1996; 82(1):91-7.Bridenbaugh PO, Cousins MJ. Neural blockade in clinical anesthesia and management of pain. Philadelphia, PA: Lippincott, Williams, & Wilkins; 1998.ACGME Competencies: Patient CareKeyword(s): Pain – Non-Opioids
#181 Oral OxymorphoneAuthor(s): Drew A Rosielle MDBackground Oxymorphone is now available in the U.S. as an oral analgesic in both immediate- and extended-release formulations. Previously, it has only been available in parenteral and rectal suppository form. This Fast Fact will review oral oxymorphone and its place in pain management.PharmacologyOxymorphone is a semi-synthetic mu-opioid receptor agonist; it has some delta-opioid receptor agonism but little activity at the kappa receptor.Oxymorphone is highly lipophilic. Parenterally it is about 10 times more potent than morphine, but – due to its very low oral bioavailability (~10%) – the equianalgesic ratio of oral morphine to oral oxymorphone is only ~3:1 (see below) (15).Oxymorphone IR has a half-life of ~8 hours, substantially longer than morphine (1.5 hours). Tmax (time to maximum serum concentration) however is rapid: ½ hour after oral administration (2).Oxymorphone ER has a half-life of ~10 hours and a Tmax of 2-3 hours (1).Oxymorphone is metabolized in the liver to 6-hydroxyoxymorphone (likely active) and oxymorphone-3-glucuronide (unknown if active). Both oxymorphone and its metabolites accumulate in renal failure; oxymorphone is removed during hemodialysis (12).Drug interactions have not been well-defined for oxymorphone; it does not effect CYP2C9 or CYP3A4 pathways (3).Taking oxymorphone IR or ER with food can increase serum levels by up to 50%; therefore it is recommended to be taken at least one hour before or two hours after a meal (4,5). Note: Co-ingestion of alcohol with oxymorphone ER can raise serum levels in a seemingly unpredictable and idiopathic manner (up to 270% in some patients) and should be avoided (4).Clinical Studies Oral oxymorphone has been studied most extensively in patients with chronic non-cancer pain, in industry funded research. No head-to-head comparisons with morphine have been undertaken. All studies suggest oxymorphone’s side effects are similar in frequency and magnitude to other oral opioids.Non-cancer pain . Oxymorphone ER has shown similar efficacy to oxycodone ER and superiority to placebo in randomized, blinded comparisons in patients with chronic low-back pain and osteoarthritis pain (9,10,11,13,14). Oxymorphone IR has been shown to be safe and effective for acute post-surgical pain (7,8).Cancer pain. Only two controlled studies have been published (6,17). Both involved transitioning cancer patients from morphine or oxycodone ER to oxymorphone ER; analgesia and side effects remained stable on the oxymorphone ER. Uncontrolled follow-up data suggest oxymorphone was effective and tolerated long-term (16).Dosing & Equianalgesic Conversions Oxymorphone is not approved for use in children; no data exist on pediatric dosing. Due to its long half-life, oxymorphone IR should be dosed every 6 hours. It comes as 5 and 10 mg tabs. Oxymorphone ER can be dosed q12 hours and comes in 5, 10, 20, and 40 mg tabs. Equianalgesic conversion data range from: 1.2-2:1 for oral oxycodone:oral oxymorphone and 1.8-3:1 for oral morphine:oral oxymorphone (i.e. 18-30 mg oral morphine = 10 mg oxymorphone) (6,9,10,15,17).Cost (Average Wholesale Price) Oxymorphone 5 mg IR tabs are $2.40/pill vs. $.20/pill for 15 mg of morphine. Oxymorphone ER 5 mg tabs are $1.60/pill vs. $0.89/pill for 15 mg of generic morphine ER vs. $1.40/pill for 10 mg of generic oxycodone ER.Conclusion Oxymorphone is a newly available oral opioid analgesic. Due to its increased cost, restrictions on taking it with food, and lack of evidence for superior efficacy, it is most appropriate for use in patients who are intolerant to morphine and other opioids.ReferencesAdams MP, Ahdieh H. Pharmacokinetics and dose-proportionality of oxymorphone extended release and its metabolites: results of a randomized crossover study. Pharmacother. 2004; 24:468-476.Adams MP and Ahdieh H. Single- and multiple-dose pharmacokinetic and dose-proportionality study of oxymorphone immediate-release tablets. Drugs Res Dev. 2005; 6:91-99.Adams MP, Pieniazszek HF, Gammaitoni AR, Ahdieh H. Oxymorphone extended release does not affect CYP2C9 or CYP3A4 metabolic pathways. J Clin Pharmacol. 2005; 45:337-345.Endo Pharmaceuticals. Oxymorphone ER (Opana ER) Prescribing Information. Available at http://www.endo.com/PDF/OPANA_ER_PI.htm.Endo Pharmaceuticals. Oxymorphone IR (Opana) Prescribing Information. Available at http://www.endo.com/pdf/Opana_IR_PI.htm.Gabrail NY, Dvergsten C, Ahdieh H. Establishing the dosage equivalency of oxymorphone extended release and oxycodone controlled release in patients with cancer pain: a randomized controlled study. Curr Med Res Opin. 2004; 20:911-918.Gimbel JS and Ahdieh H. The efficacy and safety of oral immediate-release oxymorphone for postsurgical pain. Anesth Analg. 2004; 99:1472-1477.Gimbel JS, Walker D, Ma T, Ahdieh H. Efficacy and safety of oxymorphone immediate release for the treatment of mild to moderate pain after ambulatory orthopedic surgery: results of a randomized, double-blind, placebo-controlled trial. Arch Phys Med Rehab. 2005; 86:2284-9.Hale ME, Ahdieh H, Ma T, Rauck R. Efficacy and safety of OPANA ER (oxymorphone extended release) for relief of moderate to severe chronic low back pain in opioid-experienced patients: a 12-week, randomized, double-blind, placebo-controlled study. J Pain. 2007; 8:175-184.Hale ME, Dvergsten C, Gimbel J. Efficacy and safety of oxymorphone extended release in chronic low back pain: results of a randomized, double-blind, placebo- and active-controlled phase III study. J Pain. 2005; 6:21-28.Kivitz A, Ma C, Ahdieh H, Galer BS. A 2-week, multicenter, randomized, double-blind, placebo-controlled, dose-ranging, phase III trial comparing the efficacy of oxymorphone extended release and placebo in adults with pain associated with osteoarthritis of the hip or knee. Clin Ther. 2006; 28:352-364.Lee MA, Leng MF, Cooper RM. Measurements of plasma oxycodone, noroxycodone and oxymorphone levels in a patient with bilateral nephrectomy who is undergoing haemodialysis. Palliat Med. 2005; 19:259-260.Matsumoto AK. Babul N, Ahdieh H. Oxymorphone extended-release tablets relieve moderate to severe pain and improve physicial function in osteoarthritis: results of a randomized, double-blind, placebo- and active-controlled phase III trial. Pain Med. 2005: 6;357-366.McIlwain H and Ahdieh H. Safety, tolerability, and effectiveness of oxymorphone extended release for moderate to severe osteoarthritis pain. A one-year study. Am J Therap. 2005; 12:106-112.Prommer E. Oxymorphone: a review. Support Care Cancer. 2006; 14:109-115.Slatkin N, Frailey A, Ma T, Ahdieh H. Oxymorphone extended-release offers long-term safety, effectiveness, and dose stabilization in cancer pain: results from a one-year interim report (Abstract). J Pain. 2003; 4(Suppl 1):84.Sloan P, Slatkin N, Ahdieh H. Effectiveness and safety of oral extended-release oxymorphone for the treatment of cancer pain: a pilot study. Support Care Cancer. 2005; 13:57-65.ACGME Competencies: Patient Care, Medical KnowledgeKeyword(s): Pain – Opioids
#182 Xerstomia, 2nd edAuthor(s): Gary M Reisfield MD, Drew A Rosielle MD, and George R Wilson MDBackground Xerostomia (dry mouth) is a common symptom at the end of life – affecting more than 75% of hospice patients – and is a cause of significant morbidity and diminished quality of life. This Fast Fact will review the causes and treatments of xerostomia.Salivary Functions include hydration, lubrication, and antimicrobial defense of the oral mucosa. Decreased salivation can lead to oral pain; accelerated dental morbidity; oral infections, fissures, and ulcerations; halitosis; alteration in taste and enjoyment of food; chewing and swallowing difficulties; nutritional impairment; trouble producing intelligible speech; and denture-related problems. Xerostomia is usually—although not always—associated with diminished salivary secretion (hyposialia).EtiologiesMedications with anticholinergic activity are the most common pharmacologic causes of xerostomia; these include many antiemetics, antihistamines, antipsychotics, antispasmodics, antidepressants (especially the tricyclics), and bronchodilators. Sympatholytics are also common culprits, including alpha-blockers (e.g. terazosin), alpha-2 agonists (e.g. clonidine), and beta-blockers (e.g. metoprolol). Medication-induced xerostomia may also result from direct interference with or damage to salivary tissue (as with some cancer chemotherapies). Opioids and benzodiazepines cause dry mouth, although the mechanisms are not known.Radiation for head and neck malignancies.Medical comorbidities such as HIV/AIDS, diabetes, renal failure, and Sjögren’s syndrome.Psychiatric comorbidities such as mood and anxiety disorders.Dehydration from any cause including drug-induced.TreatmentAddress underlying causes . Eliminate unnecessary drugs or substitute less drying ones. If this is not feasible, titrate to lowest effective dose or modify dosing schedule. Replacing immediate-release with controlled-release formulations of some drugs may help (e.g. with oxybutynin and tolterodine for overactive bladder).Stimulate residual gland function.Sugarless gums and candies can stimulate salivary reflexes. Products sweetened with xylitol are anticariogenic; those containing vitamin C may reduce salivary viscosity.Cholinergic agonists such as pilocarpine and cevimeline. Therapeutic effect is rapid for drug-related xerostomia; latency is greater – often 8-12 weeks – for xerostomia related to radiotherapy. Pilocarpine is started at 5 mg po tid and can be titrated to 10 mg po tid. Cevimeline is dosed at 30 mg po tid. Urinary frequency, dizziness, and sweating are common side effects (and may be attenuated by administration with dairy products). These agents are contraindicated in asthma, acute iritis, and narrow-angle glaucoma, and should be used with caution in COPD and cardiac disease. Saliva substitutes. Most have limited efficacy; many patients find frequent sips of water more useful and convenient. Topical products containing olive oil, betaine, and xylitol have been found effective for medication-induced xerostomia (e.g. Xerostom® products). Newer products with enzyme systems such as lactoperoxidase, lysozyme, and glucose oxidase (e.g. Biotène® Oralbalance Dry Mouth Gel)—offer potential antimicrobial and moisturizing benefits. Due to limited duration of action, they may be particularly useful before eating, speaking, and sleeping. Recently, custom oral appliances with artificial saliva reservoirs have become available and may be particularly useful at night.Encourage oral hydration. Humidifiers, especially during sleep, may also be helpful.Optimize oral hygiene.Antimicrobial mouthwashes (alcohol-free). Chlorhexidine gluconate oral rinse, USP 0.12%, twice daily, may be effective in preventing dental caries and oral infections.Most toothpaste products contain the surfactant sodium lauryl sulfate (SLS), which can irritate dry mucosa and inactivate the enzyme systems of the newer artificial salivas. Biotène® Dry Mouth Toothpaste contains salivary enzymes and is SLS-free. ReferencesAmerongen AVN, Veernan ECI. Current therapies for xerostomia and salivary gland hypofunction associated with cancer therapies. Support Care Cancer. 2003; 11:226-231.Chambers MS, Rosenthal DI, Weber RS. Radiation-induced xerostomia. Head & Neck. 2007; 29:58-63.Frost PM, Shirlaw PJ, Challacombe SJ, et al. Impact of wearing an intra-oral lubricating device on oral health in dry mouth patients. Oral Diseases. 2006; 12:57-62.Jensen SB, Pederson AM, Reibel J, Nauntofte B. Xerostomia and hypofunction of the salivary glands in cancer therapy. Support Care Cancer. 2003; 11:207-225.Miller M, Kearney N. Oral care for patients with cancer: a review of the literature. Cancer Nurs. 2001; 24:241-254.Scully C. Drug effects on salivary glands: dry mouth. Oral Diseases. 2003; 9:165-176.Shiboski CH, Hodgson TA, Ship JA, Schiodt M. Management of salivary hypofunction during and after radiotherapy. Oral Surg Oral Med Oral Pathol Oral Radiol Endod 2007; 103(suppl 1):S66.e1-S66.e.19.Ship JA, McCutcheon JA, Spivakovsky S, Kerr AR. Safety and effectiveness of topical dry mouth products containing olive oil, betaine, and xylitol in reducing xerostomia for polypharmacy-induced dry mouth. J Oral Rehabil. 2007; 34(10):724-734.ACGME Competencies: Patient Care, Medical KnowledgeKeyword(s): Non-Pain Symptoms and Syndromes
#183 Conflict Resolution I: Careful CommunicationAuthor(s): Adam Kendall MD, MPH and Robert Arnold MDBackground Conflicts about medical care occur frequently at the end of life. These conflicts threaten therapeutic relationships and lead to patient, healthcare provider, and family dissatisfaction. Conflict between the patient/family and physician may arise from simple factual misunderstandings about medical care. Frequently, however, conflict is driven by a patient’s or family’s emotions such as feeling unheard or ignored, as well as having goals that conflict those of the medical team. In these instances, attempting to convince a patient or family through providing additional medical information will not work. This Fast Fact provides an alternative approach to conflict resolution based on understanding a patient’s or family’s story, attending to their emotions, and establishing shared goals. A subsequentFastFact(#184) will focus on conflict resolution employing the techniques of Principled Negotiation.Learn the patient’s and family’s storyBegin discussions with a genuine curiosity to learn what they perceive to be the course of events during the illness.Explore the context of the patient’s illness narrative with attention paid to their relationships with doctors, their sources of medical information, and their life goals (seeFast Fact #26 )Avoid presenting agenda items for a meeting that are defined by the medical team’s priorities. Instead, focus on the patient’s and family’s concerns.If a patient or family is asking for treatment against the recommendation of the medical team, focus on the context of the request. Have they been let down by the medical system in the past? Have they found that others in their family have benefited from the treatment they request?Find out how they want information presented to them. Do they want specific benefits and risks? Do they want written information?Attend to emotionsConflict can cause strong emotions in healthcare providers including guilt, anger, and resentment. Acknowledge these emotions to yourself and other professionals, but strive to prevent them from interfering with your interactions with the patient and family.Patient and family emotions such as grief, disappointment, and anger are to be expected in these situations. Compassionately acknowledge and address these emotions as they arise, and allow the patient and family to express what is making a situation frustrating for them (seeFast Facts #29 and#59 ). When people are emotionally stressed, they may have trouble cognitively processing information. Empathically attending to emotions often allows a patient or family to move on to understanding medical information.If a family is focusing on what they believe was an error in care, be transparent about where a mistake may have been made (seeFast Facts #194 and#195 ). Apologize. Even if it was not an error, one can acknowledge how frustrating the situation is. Saying “I can tell that this situation is frustrating for you,” is not an admission of error—it is empathic.Establish shared goals for treatmentUse the patient’s core values as a foundation for developing a treatment plan. “I would like to know more about your mother and what her values have been during her life.”Ask about a patient’s goals including what they would want if they were dying or if there were no curative treatments available for their condition.When there are requests for ineffectual treatment, describe instead where the medical team can make a difference for the patient, in relation to their goals. “Please correct me if I’m wrong, but it sounds like your mother really values her independence and freedom from being in pain. Let’s try to figure out how we can best help her achieve these goals.” Providing medical information to patients and families may seem at first to be the most natural approach to resolving conflict. Addressing the underlying roots of conflict will have a longer lasting effect. The above approach emphasizes resolving conflict through finding mutual trust and shared goals between physicians, patients, and families.Reference Stone D, Patton B, Heen S. Difficult Conversations: How to Discuss What Matters Most. New York, NY: Penguin Books; 1999.ACGME Competencies: Interpersonal and Communication SkillsKeyword(s): Communication
#184 Conflict Resolution II: Principled NegotiationAuthor(s): Adam Kendall MD, MPH and Robert Arnold MDBackground When conflicts about medical care persist despite gaining mutual trust and a deep understanding of goals (seeFast Fact #183 ), it may be effective to use principled negotiation. Principled negotiation is an approach to resolving conflict that avoids power struggles and unwanted compromises. The following is an illustration of the steps that are involved. Within each step, we will refer to a case example: a family who is requesting artificial feeding against medical advice for their father who is dying from end-stage dementia.Separate people from the problem. Identify the fundamental problem, separating that from individuals’—on both sides—intentions and culpability.The problem is not that the family members are “in denial” that their loved one is dying or “uneducated” when they do not hear the medical team’s recommendations.The problem is not that the family is acting out their frustration by making unreasonable demands.Nor is the problem that the medical team and hospital are trying to withhold treatment from the patient or “giving up” on him.The problem is that the patientis dying, no longer able to eat properly, and that artificial nutrition does not improve quality or quantity of life in this situation.Focus on interests. Listen to requests and demands but try to look into underlying interests. In addition, express the intentions and goals of the medical team.The family wants what is best for the patient. Their intent may be to provide comfort and to build up the patient’s strength, and to prevent a painful starvation.The medical team wants to provide the best medical care for the patient. Their intent may be to avoid an intervention that has no clear benefit for the patient, may cause harm, and may not have been desired by the patient.Invent solutions. Avoid contrasting different philosophies of medical care. Instead, propose a plan of care that meets a family’s expectations without detracting from good medical care. Consideration could be given to:Meeting the family’s goals of providing food by allowing for the patient to taste home cooked meals.A short trial of tube-feeding with the plan to continue only if the overall quality of life for the patient improves.A trial of attentive oral feeding with a plan to reconsider tube feeding if the patient appears to be hungry or otherwise suffering.Solutions that do not promote mutual interests are: placing a feeding tube without a plan to measure its success or failure at meeting a goal, arranging for another medical team to take over the patient’s care, or referring the case to an ethics committee.Outline objective criteria. If a time trial is being pursued, agree upon what the deciding factors would be in determining a trial’s success. Provide objective information to substantiate medical recommendations.Establish signs of improvement or worsening such as functional ability, weight, ability to interact, and level of consciousness.Establish criteria for harm such as infections, restraint or sedative use, hospitalizations or emergency department visits.Consider providing publications from organizations that advocate for patients and families, and are not associated with physicians or hospitals.Provide opinions or guidance from individuals outside of the conflict. These could include social workers, case managers, chaplains, or therapists.ReferencesFisher R, Ury W. Getting to Yes: Negotiating Agreement Without Giving In. New York, NY: Penguin Books; 1992.King DA, Quill T. Working with families in palliative care: one size does not fit all. J Pall Med. 2006; 9(3):704-715.ACGME Competencies: Interpersonal and Communication SkillsKeyword(s): Communication
#185 Topical Opioids for PainAuthor(s): Juliet Jacobsen MD, DPBackground Clinical experience and preliminary research have suggested that topical opioids are effective local analgesics. ThisFast Fact reviews the mechanism of action, research data, and dosing information on topically applied opioids.Mechanism of action The insight that opioids exert a local analgesic effect is based on several observations: 1) opioid receptors have been found on peripheral nerves and inflamed tissue, 2) morphine and its metabolites are largely undetectable systemically when applied topically to skin ulcers (suggesting the analgesic effect is local), and 3) peripheral opioid injections for local analgesia, such as intra-articular morphine after knee surgery, have been found to be effective in several trials. Of note, animal studies suggest that opioids can accelerate wound healing by up-regulating nitric-oxide synthase. The relevance of this for humans is unknown and there is no consensus regarding whether or not topical opioids benefit or impede wound healing in humans.Research data Several small case series have shown rapid relief using topical opioids in patients with pain due to skin infiltration of tumor, skin ulcers of malignant and non-malignant origin, severe oral mucositis, knee arthritis, and tenesmoid pain. Most studies have evaluated morphine, although diamorphine and methadone have also shown efficacy. Skin ulcers: Three randomized, double-blinded, placebo-controlled studies totaling 34 patients assessed the efficacy of topical opioids for treating painful ulcers (mostly sacral pressure ulcers). These studies found significantly lower pain scores in patients treated with topical opioids compared with placebo. In general, pain decreased 2-3 points on a 0-10 pain scale. Another blinded, controlled trial of 18 patients showed topical morphine to be no more effective than placebo. This study’s outcome however was complete pain relief, not just significant analgesic response as in the other studies. Itching and burning are common side effects reported by both patients receiving morphine and placebo vehicle-gel. No systemic side effects were reported.Mucositis: A dose-response relationship has been reported for patients with painful oral mucositis; rinses with 0.2% morphine solution showed better pain relief than those with 0.1%. One non-blinded, randomized study of 26 patients that compared morphine mouthwash (an oral rinse of 0.2% morphine solution) with “magic” mouthwash (a mixture of equal parts lidocaine, diphenhydramine, and magnesium aluminum hydroxide) found significantly decreased duration and intensity of pain in the morphine mouthwash group. Administration Topical opioid gels and mouthwashes are not available commercially and need to be prepared by a compounding pharmacist. Gel: Most studies used a mixture of 10 mg of morphine sulfate injection (10 mg/ml) in 8 gm of Intrasite gel. Patients are instructed to cover their wound with the gel (usually using 5-10 ml) and then loosely dress it with gauze. Duration of analgesia varies widely; preparations usually need to be applied one to three times per day. Both morphine sulfate and diamorphine hydrochloride mixed with Intrasite gel have been found to be stable irrespective of temperature and light exposure for up to 28 days.Mouthwash: The morphine mouthwash which has been studied is an oral rinse of 15 ml of 0.2% morphine solution (2000 mg morphine clorhydrate diluted in 1000 ml of water). It can be taken every 3 hours as needed. Patients should be instructed to hold the mouthwash in their mouth for 2 minutes then spit out. They should be counseled carefully to not swallow the mouthwash to avoid systemic effects from the morphine. Because of this it is most useful for patients with predominantly oral (not esophageal) pain. Conclusion There are limited trial data to support the use of topical morphine gel and mouthwash for painful cutaneous ulcers and oral mucositis. In patients taking systemic opioids the added benefit of topical ones (e.g. limited systemic side effects) is diminished.References Carnel SB, Blakesless DB, Oswald SG, Barnes M. Treatment of radiation and chemotherapy-induced stomatitis.Otolaryngol Head Neck Surg. 1990; 102:326-30. Cerchietti LC, Navigante AH, Bonomi MR et al. Effect of topical morphine for mucositis-associated pain following concomitant chemoradiotherapy for head and neck carcinoma.Cancer . 2002; 95:2230-2236.Note: Erratum published inCancer 2003; 97(4):1137. DOI: 10.1002/cncr.11257. Flock P. Pilot study to determine the effectiveness of diamorphine gel to control pressure ulcer pain.J Pain Symptom Manage. 2003; 25:547-554. Gallagher RE, Arndt DR, Hunt K. Analgesic effects of topical methadone; a report of four cases.Clin J Pain . 2005;21:190-192. Kalso E, Tramer MR, Carroll D et al. Pain relief from intra-articular morphine after knee surgery: a qualitative systematic review.Pain. 1997; 71:127-34. Krajnik M, Zylicz Z, Finlay I et al. Potential uses of topical opioids in palliative care – report of 6 cases.Pain. 1999; 80:121-125. Picard PR, Tramer MR, McQuay HJ et al. Analgesic efficacy of peripheral opioids (all except intra-articular): a qualitative systematic review of randomized controlled trials.Pain. 1997; 72:309-318. Poonawala T, Levay-young BK, Hebbel RP, Gupta K. Opioids heal ischemic wounds in the rat.Wound Repair Regen. 2005; 13:165-74. Porzio G, Marchetti P. Topical morphine in the treatment of painful ulcers.J Pain Symptom Manage. 2005; 30:304-305. Twillman RK, Long TD, Cathers TA. Treatment of painful skin ulcers with topical opioids.J Pain Symptom Manage . 1999; 17:288-292. Vernassiere C, Cornet C, Trechot P et al. Study to determine the efficacy of topical morphine on painful chronic skin ulcers.J Wound Care. 2005; 14:289-93. Zeppetella G, Paul J, Ribeiro MDC. Analgesic efficacy of morphine applied topically to painful ulcers.J Pain Symptom Manage. 2003; 25:555-558. Zeppetella G, Joel SP, Ribeiro MD. Stability of morphine sulphate and diamorphine hydrochloride in intrasite gel.Palliat Med. 2005; 19:131-6. Zeppetella G, Ribeiro MDC. Morphine in Intrasite gel applied topically to painful ulcers.J Pain Symptom Manage. 2005; 29:118-119. ACGME Competencies: Medical KnowledgeKeyword(s): Pain – Opioids
#186 Anxiety in Palliative Care - Causes and DiagnosisAuthor(s): Joseph Stoklosa, Kevin Patterson MD, Drew Rosielle MD, and Robert Arnold MDBackground Anxiety is a state of apprehension and fear resulting from the perception of a current or future threat to oneself. The term is used both to describe a symptom and a variety of psychiatric disorders in which anxiety is a salient symptom. This Fast Fact will discuss the causes and evaluation of anxiety; a future Fast Fact will address treatment.Prevalence Anxiety is a common symptom in those facing life-threatening illnesses. At least 25% and cancer patients and 50% of CHF and COPD patients experience significant anxiety. At least 3% of patients with advanced cancer and 10% of COPD inpatients meet DSM criteria for Generalized Anxiety Disorder (see below).EtiologiesAnxiety may be present as part of one of several psychiatric disorders (see below).Anxiety is often a prominent component of acute or chronic pain, dyspnea, nausea, or cardiac arrhythmias.Adverse drug effects: corticosteroids, psychostimulants, and some antidepressants.Drug withdrawal: alcohol, opioids, benzodiazepines, nicotine, clonidine, antidepressants, and corticosteroids.Metabolic causes: hyperthyroidism and syndromes of adrenergic or serotonergic excess.Existential and psychosocial concerns about dying, disability, loss, legacy, family, finances, and religion/spirituality.Psychiatric Disorders with anxiety as a prominent symptomGeneralized anxiety disorder is a psychiatric disorder characterized by pervasive and excessive anxiety and worry about a number of events or activities (such as work or school performance), occurring more days than not for at least 6 months. The anxiety and worry are associated with at least 3 of the following 6 symptoms: restlessness, easy fatigue, difficulty concentrating, irritability, muscle tension, and sleep disturbance.Panic disorder is characterized by recurrent panic attacks.SeeFast Fact #145 for its evaluation and management.Adjustment disorder occurs within 3 months of a major stressor, and causes marked distress and functional impairment. Usually it is characterized by a depressed mood but anxiety can also be its most prominent affective component.Acute- or post-traumatic stress disorders occur after an emotionally traumatic life-event and are characterized by anxiousness and arousal, as well as by numbness, flashbacks, intrusive thoughts, and avoidance of stimuli which remind the patient of the trauma.Phobias are marked, persistent fears brought about by specific situations or objects.EvaluationComplete a thorough history and physical exam, in particular ask about: Prior episodes or anxiety, depression, PTSD, alcohol, and drug use.Prior and current treatment by a mental health professional.Presence of specific trigger situations or thoughts leading to anxiety.Presence of apprehension, dread, insomnia, and hypervigilance; as well as physical symptoms such as diaphoresis, dyspnea, muscle tension, and tremulousness. Seek help from a professional familiar with the psychiatric disorders when anxiety is a prominent and functionally impairing part of a patient’s symptoms.Symptoms that can be confused with anxiety are agitated delirium (seeFast Facts #1 ,60 ) and akathisia, an unpleasant sense of motor restlessness from dopamine-blocking medications such as antipsychotics and some antiemetics.Formal screening tools exist, but there is no consensus on the benefit of their routine use. Commonly used tools which evaluate for anxiety as a symptom include the Edmonton Symptom Assessment Scale, the Memorial Symptom Assessment Scale, and the Hospital Anxiety and Depression Scale.ReferencesBlock SD. Psychological issues in end-of-life care. J Palliat Med. 2006; 9:751-772.Mikkelsen RL, et al. Anxiety and depression in patients with chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD). A review. Nordic J Psychiatry. 2004; 58:65-70.Friedmann E, et al. Relationship of depression, anxiety, and social isolation to chronic heart failure outpatient mortality. Am Heart J. 2006; 11:152.Tremblay A and Breitbart W. Psychiatric dimensions of palliative care. Neurol Clin. 2001; 19(4):949-67.Bjelland I, et al. The validity of the Hospital Anxiety and Depression Scale. An updated literature review. J Psychosom Res. 2002; 52(2):69-77.Bruera E, Kuehn N, Miller MJ, Selmser P, Macmillan K. The Edmonton Symptom Assessment System (ESAS): a simple method of the assessment of palliative care patients. J Palliat Care. 1991; 7:6-9.Portenoy RK, Thaler HT, Kornblith AB, et al. The Memorial Symptom Assessment Scale: an instrument for the evaluation of symptom prevalence, characteristics and distress. Eur J Cancer. 1994; 30A(9):1326-36.ACGME Competencies : Medical Knowledge, Patient CareKeyword(s):Non-Pain Symptoms and Syndromes
#187 Non-Tricyclic Antidepressants for Neuropathic PainAuthor(s): Pippa Hawley B.Med, FRCPCBackground Tricyclic antidepressants (TCAs) have long been recognized as effective agents for neuropathic pain. Due to their sedating and anticholinergic side effects there has been much interest in newer antidepressant agents with different side effect profiles. This Fast Fact reviews the use of non-tricyclic antidepressants for neuropathic pain.Pharmacology Serotonin (5HT) and norepinephrine (NE) mediate descending inhibition of ascending pain pathways in the brain and spinal cord. Experience has suggested that antidepressants which enhance NE action are more effective analgesics than those which predominantly enhance 5HT action, such as with many of the newer antidepressants. TCAs are thought to cause analgesia by NE and 5HT reuptake inhibition; they also have other pharmacologic properties that may contribute to analgesia such as reducing sympathetic activity, NMDA-receptor antagonism, anticholinergic activity, and sodium-channel blockade. Non-tricyclic antidepressants seem to be less efficacious for neuropathic pain (see below): this may in part be because of their ‘cleaner’ pharmacodynamic profiles.Clinical Evidence Most randomized controlled trials of non-tricyclic antidepressants for pain have been for diabetic peripheral neuropathy or post-herpetic neuralgia. There have been few studies in other neuropathic conditions and none in cancer-related pain. There have been very few head-to-head comparisons of antidepressants, which limits understanding of their relative efficacy.Selective Serotonin Reuptake Inhibitors (SSRIs): Fluoxetine is not effective for neuropathic pain.Paroxetine andcitalopram have shown only mild benefit for HIV-related and diabetic neuropathy in small studies. Other SSRIs have not been evaluated.Serotonin Norepinephrine Reuptake Inhibitors (SNRIs):Low doses ofvenlafaxine are predominantly serotonergic, but higher doses add substantial noradrenergic effects. Doses of 150-225 mg/day appear to have mild to moderate analgesic effect (30-50% reduction in pain) with a number needed-to-treat (NNT) of 4.6 in painful diabetic neuropathy (only one out of every 4-5 patients treated will benefit). In contrast, many trials of TCAs for neuropathic pain have shown NNT of 2-3. One head-to-head trial showed venlafaxine 225 mg/day had the same tolerability as 150 mg/day of imipramine (a TCA), but venlafaxine was less effective for pain. Side-effects of venlafaxine include nausea, sedation, headache and dizziness. The usual starting dose is 37.5 mg daily, increasing weekly in 37.5 mg increments. Use of venlafaxine for analgesia is not FDA approved; a 75 mg tab costs approximately $3.70 (average US wholesale price).Duloxetine has been shown to have a mild to moderate analgesic effect in industry-sponsored trials in diabetic peripheral neuropathy (NNT 5.2) at a dose of 60 mg daily. Onset of analgesia is at about 1 week, with maximum effect at about 4 weeks. A dose of 60 mg BID may lead to increased analgesia but at the expense of an increased risk of side-effects, particularly nausea, sedation, constipation, sweating, and insomnia.Duloxetine is licensed for use in diabetic peripheral neuropathic pain in the USA. A 60 mg tab costs approximately $3.50. Other Antidepressants Buproprion is a dopamine and norepinephrine reuptake inhibitor and was found to have a mild analgesic effect in one study involving 41 patients with a mix of neuropathic pain syndromes.Mirtazapine has a complicated pharmacology and has not yet been evaluated as an analgesic.Summary There are relatively well defined and preferred therapies for neuropathic pain including newer generation anticonvulsants (such as gabapentin), TCAs, and opioids in select patients. In patients with ongoing pain despite treatment with these agents, or who are intolerant to them, venlafaxine or duloxetine may be helpful. There are no comparative studies between non-tricyclics for neuropathic pain, thus an agent should be selected based on its side-effect profile, cost, and familiarity with use.ReferencesAttal N, et al. EFNS guidelines on pharmacological treatment of neuropathic pain. Eur J Neurology. 2006; 13:1153-1169.Saarto T, Wiffen PJ. Antidepressants for neuropathic pain. Cochrane Database of Systematic Reviews 2007, Issue 4. Art. No.: CD005454. DOI: 10.1002/14651858.CD005454.pub2.Moulin DE, et al. Pharmacological management of chronic neuropathic pain. Consensus statement and guidelines from the Canadian Pain Society. Pain Res Manage. 2007; 12(1):13-21.Rowbotham MC, et al. Venlafaxine extended release in the treatment of painful diabetic neuropathy: A double-blind, placebo-controlled study. Pain. 2004; 110:697-706. (Erratum in 2005; 113:248).Sindrup SH, et al. Venlafaxine vs imipramine in painful polyneuropathy. A randomized, controlled trial. Neurology. 2003; 60:1284-1289.Goldstein DJ, et al. Duloxetine vs placebo in patients with painful diabetic neuropathy. Pain. 2005; 116:109-18.Bomholt SF, Mikkelse JD, Blackburn-Munro G. Antinociceptive effects of the antidepressants amitriptyline, duloxetine, mirtazapine and citalopram in animal models of acute, persistent and neuropathic pain., Neuropharmacology. 2005; 48(2):252-263.Semenchuk MR, Sherman S, Davis B. A double blind randomized controlled trial of buproprion SR for the treatment of neuropathic pain. Neurology. 2001; 57(9):1583-8.ACGME Competencies : Medical KnowledgeKeyword(s):Pain – Non-Opioids
#188 Hepatic Encephalopathy in ESLDAuthor(s): Julie Wilson Childers MD and Robert Arnold MDBackground Hepatic encephalopathy (HE) is a neuropsychiatric syndrome with a fluctuating course associated with end stage liver disease (ESLD). HE symptoms, which are graded from 0 to IV, range from subtle personality or sleep disturbances to confusion and coma. Severe HE (grade III or IV) is manifested by gross disorientation, bizarre behavior, stupor, or coma (1). Without transplantation, severe HE signifies a poor prognosis (58% 1 year and 77% 3 year mortality in one case series) (2). In addition, 15% of patients awaiting liver transplantation die before receiving an organ (3).Etiology The cause of HE is uncertain, but may be related to the accumulation of neurotoxic substances normally metabolized by the liver; these include ammonia and endogenous benzodiazepine-like substances that activate GABA-receptors to cause neurotoxicity.Evaluation HE is a diagnosis of exclusion, and in one study 80% of cases were associated with an identifiable secondary cause such as gastrointestinal bleeding, infection (including spontaneous bacterial peritonitis), renal failure, alcohol withdrawal, excessive dietary protein, volume depletion, or drugs (particularly benzodiazepines) (4). Serum ammonia levels are usually elevated in patients with HE, although the utility of following these has not been established.Therapy begins with correction of the underlying causes if this is consistent with the goals of care. Specific therapy of HE is aimed at limiting production of and increasing excretion of intestinally derived toxins, particularly ammonia.Non-absorbable disaccharides such aslactulose andlactitol are the mainstay of treatment though there is a lack of controlled evidence supporting their use (5). These agents not only cause increased transit time through the gut and less absorption of toxins, but also promote bacterial fermentation, leading to a hostile environment for ammonia-producing bacteria. The daily dose of lactulose should be titrated to result in two to four soft stools daily. For most patients the daily dose is between 30 and 60 grams. Side effects include gastrointestinal cramping, diarrhea, and flatulence.Non-absorbable antibiotics such asneomycin andvancomycin were the first treatments for HE. They lower ammonia by combating urea-producing bacteria in the gut. Neomycin likely produces more rapid improvement than lactulose but its use is limited by its nephro- and oto-toxic effects (5).Rifaximin is a nonabsorbable derivative of rifampin which received orphan drug status from the FDA in 2005 for treatment of HE. Rifaximin, given at 400 mg orally three times a day, is as effective as neomycin or lactitol and better tolerated than other nonabsorbable antibiotics (6). Rifaximin costs $4.00 a pill (average wholesale price). Because of this and its lack of clear superiority to disaccharides rifaximin is considered a second-line agent for patients who cannot tolerate or who are not responding to disaccharide therapy.Other therapies have limited efficacy in treating HE and play no clear role in its management. These include branched chain amino acids (7), the benzodiazepine antagonist flumazenil (8, 9), and limitation of dietary protein (10).Advance care planning The patient's values, goals of care, and treatment options should be discussed in the context of HE’s poor prognosis. A health care proxy should be established before cognitive impairment prevents this.Supportive care The patient and family must be educated to recognize HE’s symptoms and understand its fluctuating course, avoiding precipitating factors when possible. Patients who are confused should be reoriented and measures should be taken to prevent falls, skin breakdown, and aspiration. Intravenous fluids, nasogastric feeding, and airway protection are sometimes appropriate. Dose-adjusted acetaminophen ( <2 gm/day) is the first line analgesic. Opioids can worsen HE but are sometimes necessary to adequately treat pain; their use should be closely monitored and balanced with the patient’s degree of suffering and goals of care (11). Dying patients should receive attentive comfort care. Besides pain – dyspnea, restlessness, edema, and secretion management are common challenges in dying ESLD patients.ReferencesBlei AT, Cordoba J. Practice guidelines: Hepatic encephalopathy. Am J Gastroenterology. 2001; 96(7):1968-1976.Bustamante J, Rimola A, Ventura PJ, Navasa M, Cirera I, Reggiardo V, et al. Prognostic significance of hepatic encephalopathy in patients with cirrhosis. J Hepatol. 1999; 30:890–895.Russo MW, LaPointe-Rudow D, Kinkhabwaa M, Emond J, Brown RS. Impact of adult living donor liver transplantation on waiting time survival in candidates listed for liver transplantation. Am J Transplantation. 2004; 4(3):427–431.Fessel JM, Conn HO. An analysis of the causes and prevention of hepatic coma. Gastroenterology. 1972; 62:191.Als-Nielsen B, Gluud LL, Gluud C. Nonabsorbable disaccharides for hepatic encephalopathy. Cochrane Database of Systematic Reviews 2004, Issue 2. Art. No.: CD003044. DOI: 10.1002/14651858.CD003044.pub2.Mas A, Rodes J, Sunyer L, et al. Comparison of rifaximin and lactitol in the treatment of acute hepatic encephalopathy: results of a randomized, double-blinded, double-dummy, controlled clinical trial. J Hepatol. 2003; 38(1):51-8.Als-Nielsen B, Koretz RL, Kjaergard LL, Gluud C. Branched-chain amino acids for hepatic encephalopathy. Cochrane Database of Systematic Reviews 2003, Issue 1. Art. No.: CD001939. DOI: 10.1002/14651858.CD001939.Barbaro G, Di Lorenzo G, Soldini M, et al. Flumazenil for hepatic encephalopathy grade III and IVa in patients with cirrhosis: an Italian multicenter double-blind, placebo-controlled, cross-over study. Hepatology. 1998; 28(2):374-8.Als-Nielsen B, Gluud LL, Gluud C. Benzodiazepine receptor antagonists for hepatic encephalopathy. Cochrane Database of Systematic Reviews 2004, Issue 2. Art. No.: CD002798. DOI: 10.1002/14651858.CD002798.pub2.Cordoba J, Lopez-Hellin J and Planas M, et al. Normal protein diet for episodic hepatic encephalopathy. J Hepatol. 2004; 41:38–43.Larson AM and Curtis JR. Integrating palliative care for liver transplant candidates: 'Too well for transplant, too sick for life'. JAMA. 2006;ACGME Competencies: Patient Care, Medical KnowledgeKeyword(s): Prognosis, Pain - Evaluation
#189 Prognosis in Decompensated Chronic Liver FailureAuthor(s): Brigid Dolan MD and Robert Arnold MDBackground In 2004, liver failure resulted in over 26,000 deaths, making it the twelfth leading cause of death in the United States. Patients with compensated chronic liver failure (without ascites, variceal bleeding, encephalopathy, or jaundice) have a median survival of 12 years. After decompensation, median survival drops to ~ 2 years. This Fast Fact reviews prognosis in chronic liver failure, focusing on two validated prognostic indices. Of note, these indices predict prognosis for patients without liver transplantation.The Child’s-Turcotte-Pugh (CTP) score includes 5 variables, each scored 1-3:Numerical Value Ascites None Slight Moderate/Severe Encephalopathy None Grade 1-2 Grade 3-4 Bilirubin (mg/dL)< 2.0 2.0-3.0 >3.0 Albumin (mg/L) > 3.5 2.8-3.5<2.8 Increase in seconds from normal Prothrombin time 1-3 4-6 >6.0 Patients are grouped into three classes based on the total CTP score, which is simply the sum of the scores for each of the 5 variables. Patients scoring 5-6 points are considered to have ‘Class A’ failure; their 1 and 2 year median survivals are 95% and 90%, respectively. A score of 7-9 is considered Class B with median survivals of 80% at 1 year and 70% at two years. Class C patients (10-15) have far greater mortality: 1-year median survival is 45% and 2-year is 38%. Variations in the timing and subjectivity inherent in the scoring of the CTP (e.g. in grading ascites or encephalopathy) are its major limitations. In addition, the scale does not include renal function, an important prognostic factor in liver failure. TheModel for End-stage Liver Disease (MELD) score was developed in 2000 to overcome the above-mentioned limitations and determine survival benefit from transjugular intrahepatic portosystemic shunting. It is currently used to help determine organ allocation for liver transplantation, and there is increasing evidence that it can also be used generally to predict survival in patients with chronic liver failure. The MELD score relies on laboratory values alone (serum creatinine, total bilirubin, and INR). An additional benefit over CTP is that it can predict prognosis on the order of months with more precision – making it helpful for determining hospice eligibility in the US. The formula to calculate MELD score is complex, and a calculator can be found at:http://www.unos.org/resources/meldPeldCalculator.asp .MELD ScorePredicted 6month survivalPredicted 12 month survivalPredicted 24 month survival0-9 98% 93% 90%10-19 92% 86% 80%20-29 78% 71% 66%30-39 40% 37% 33%Other important prognostic variables The hepatorenal syndrome (HRS) – renal failure from renal arterial under-filling due to decompensated liver failure – portends a particularly poor prognosis. Most patients with type-1 HRS (rapid and severe renal failure) die within 8-10 weeks even with therapy. Median survival with type-2 HRS (chronic, less severe renal failure with serum creatinine usually 1.5-2 mg/dL) is around 6 months. Both older age and hepatocellular carcinoma also adversely affect survival. While the CTP and MELD systems provide objective guidance to prognostication in liver failure, clinical judgment, patient comorbidities, the rate of decompensation, and the likelihood of transplantation all should additionally affect the assessment and communication of a patient’s prognosis in liver disease.ReferencesMinino, et al. Deaths: Preliminary Data for 2004. National Vital Statistics Reports. June 28 2006; 54(19):1-52.D’Amico, et al. Natural history and prognostic indicators of survival in cirrhosis: a systematic review of 118 studies. J Hepatology. 2006; 44:217–231.Diehl A. Alcoholic and nonalcoholic steatohepatitis. In: Goldman L, Ausiello D, eds. Cecil Textbook of Medicine. 22nd ed. Philadelphia, PA: Saunders; 2004:935–6.Cholongitas, et al. Systematic review: the model for end-stage liver disease – should it replace Child-Pugh’s classification for assessing prognosis in cirrhosis? Alimentary Pharmacol Therapeutics. 2005; 22:1079-1089.Said, et al. Model for end stage liver disease score predicts mortality across a broad spectrum of liver disease. J Hepatology. 2004; 40:897-903.Cardenas, et al. Hepatorenal Syndrome: A dreaded complication of end-stage liver disease. Am J Gastroenterol. 2005; 100:460-467.ACGME Competencies: Patient Care, Medical Knowledge
#190 Parenteral Nutrition in Advanced Cancer PatientsAuthor(s): Mehrnoush Mirhosseini MD and Robin Fainsinger MDBackground Concerns about anorexia and weight loss are commonly expressed by advanced cancer patients and their families. Parenteral nutrition is a controversial and expensive treatment that is sometimes considered to assist with nutrition in advanced cancer patients. PN involves the intravenous delivery of a mixture of lipids, carbohydrates, amino acids, vitamins, and minerals. This Fast Fact reviews the role of PN in advanced cancer patients.The Problem Weight loss in advanced cancer is frequently due to insufficient caloric intake as well as cancer-mediated hypermetabolism and hypercatabolism. These latter problems are caused by catabolic proinflammatory cytokines and eicosanoids and are responsible for much of the accelerated muscle wasting (cachexia) seen in advanced cancer. Patients and families frequently worry about malnutrition and starvation and request help from physicians to ameliorate these.The Role of PN PN is usually considered outside the standard of care for most patients with advanced cancer. This is based on clinical research findings and other observations:With a few specific exceptions (such as head and neck cancer patients undergoing radiation therapy), caloric supplementation of any kind has not been shown to benefit advanced cancer patients, and – if indicated – can almost always be achieved enterally.There is no physiologic basis to assume that PN would affect the inflammatory and catabolic aspects of cachexia.PN brings potential risks and burdens: laboratory testing, indwelling intravenous lines, infections, metabolic derangements, liver and pancreatic dysfunction. Patients with progressive weight loss should have careful clinical assessments for potentially reversible causes (such as inadequate caloric intake or depression). Education and emotional and family support are the cornerstones of treatment otherwise. Drug interventions are an active focus of research although their efficacy remains controversial (seeFast Facts #93 andFast Facts #100 ).PN guidelines There does remain however a small subset of advanced cancer patients for whom PN may be an appropriate therapy to improve quality and/or length of life. The following guidelines have been suggested to identify patients appropriate for PN:Enteral nutrition (including tube feeding) is not an option or there is a specific benefit expected from parenteral nutrition (e.g. inoperable malignant bowel obstruction, short bowel syndrome, and malabsorption). These are patients for whom a non-functional GI tract, and not cachexia itself, is the major problem.Death is probable from starvation or malnutrition earlier than anticipated from disease progression alone.The patient has a life expectancy of at least several months to allow a proper trial of PN (Karnofsky Performance Scale Score >50 or ECOG performance status ≤2).The patient has a good self-assessed quality of life; life-prolongation is consistent with their goals of care and the potential risks of PN are acceptable to the patient.The patient or caregiver can safely accommodate PN if at home: the home environment is safe and clean; someone is able to set-up and administer the PN; and the patient can be clinically monitored, including laboratory investigation.Monitoring: electrolytes, liver and renal function, and triglycerides require close monitoring. In addition, careful assessments of the patient’s response to treatment and global clinical course are needed to ensure PN remains an appropriate intervention.Summary PN can be an important palliative treatment, but for only a small group of cancer patients. Careful patient selection and monitoring is important to ensure that PN is meeting patient-defined goals of care. ReferencesMoynihan T, Kelly DG, Fisch MJ. To feed or not to feed: Is that the right question? J Clinical Oncol. 2005; 23(25):6526-6529.Bondly C, Jotoi A. Overview of the management of the anorexia/weight loss syndrome. In: Bruera E, Higginson I, Ripamonti C, Von Gunten CF, eds. Textbook of Palliative Medicine. New York, NY: Oxford University Press; 2006:538-545.Strasser F, Bruera E. Update on anorexia and cachexia. Hematol Oncol Clin North Am. 2002; 16:589-617.Nitenberg G, Raynard B. Nutritional support of the cancer patient: Issues and dilemmas. Crit Rev Oncol Hematol. 2000; 34:137-168.MacDonald N, Easson AM, Mazurak VC, Dunn GP, Baracos VE. Understanding and managing cancer cachexia. J Am Coll Surg. 2003; 197:143-161.Mirhosseni N, Fainsinger RL, Baracos V. Parenteral nutrition in advanced cancer: Indications in clinical practice guidelines. J Palliat Med. 2005; 8(5):914-918.Turelli GF, Campos AC, Meguid MM. Use of TPN in terminally ill cancer patients. Nutrition. 1999; 15(9):665-667.Dy SM. Enteral and parenteral nutrition in terminally ill cancer patients: A review of the literature. Am J Hosp Palliat Care. 2006; 23(5):369-377.CH Regional Palliative Care Program. Clinical Practice Guidelines: Home parenteral nutrition and cancer selection criteria for patients with advanced cancer. Available at: http://www.palliative.org/PC/ClinicalInfo/Clinical%20Practice%20Guidelines/PDF%20files/Home%20Parenteral.htm. Accessed May 21, 2009.ACGME Competencies: Patient CareKeyword(s): Ethics, Law, Policy, Health Systems
#191 Prognostication in Patients Receiving DialysisAuthor(s): Matthew Hudson, Steven Weisbord MD, Robert Arnold MDBackground End stage renal disease (ESRD) is a highly prevalent and rapidly increasing condition. While dialysis prolongs life in patients with ESRD, life expectancy remains only a third to a sixth as long as similar patients not on dialysis. The overall one and five year mortality rates are 25% and 60%, respectively. Approximately 20% of ESRD patient deaths occur after a decision to stop dialysis, highlighting the importance of discussions of prognosis and goals of care with this chronically ill population. This Fast Fact reviews the current data regarding prognostication in patients receiving chronic hemo- and peritoneal dialysis. Note: renal transplantation reduces mortality and the following data do not consider patients with functioning kidney transplants.Prognostic Factors Several patient-specific factors influence prognosis:Age: For 1-year increments beginning at age 18, there is a 3 to 4% increase in annual mortality compared to the general population. 1 and 2 year mortality rates go from 10 and 12% at 25-29 years of age, to 25% and 42% at 65-69 years, to 39% and 61% at 80-84 years of age.Functional status: the relative risk of dying within 3 years of starting dialysis is 1.44 for those with Karnofsky Performance Status scores of <70 compared to those with a score 70 (see Fast Fact #13 ).Albumin: a low serum albumin level, both at baseline and during the course of dialysis treatment, is a consistent and strong predictor of death. For example, the 1 and 2 year survival of patients with an albumin of >3.5 g/dL is 86% and 76% respectively, compared to 50% and 17% if one’s albumin is less than 3.5.Prognostic Tools It has long been recognized that patient comorbidity is strongly correlated with prognosis in ESRD. An age-modified Charlson Comorbidity Index (CCI), which stratifies patients based on medical comorbidities and age, has been successfully used to predict mortality in dialysis-dependent patients (8):Modified Charlson Comorbidity Index: Total score is the sum of the comorbidity points Comorbidity Points 1 point each for coronary artery disease, congestive heart failure, peripheral vascular disease, cerebrovascular disease, dementia, chronic pulmonary disease, connective tissue disorder, peptic ulcer disease, mild liver disease, diabetes1 point for every decade over 40 (e.g. a 65 year old would receive 3 points).2 points each for hemiplegia, moderate-to-severe renal disease (including being on dialysis), diabetes with end-organ damage, cancer (including leukemia or lymphoma)3 points for moderate-to-severe liver disease6 points each for metastatic solid tumor or AIDSModified CCI Score Totals Low score (£3)Moderate (4-5)High (6-7)Very High (³8)Annual mortality rate 0.030.130.270.49 For example, a 66 year old male on dialysis with a history of CHF, COPD, and diabetes with retinopathy would have a CCI score of 9 and a nearly 50% chance of dying within a year. Using this, a provider could discuss with the patient his prognosis and use this to facilitate further discussion regarding planning for the future, including end-of-life decisions. The Index of Coexistent Disease (ICED), a general illness severity index, has also shown predictive power in ESRD. The scale’s complexity and length however (it entails asking over 100 questions) limit its clinical usefulness.Summary The age-modified CCI, in conjunction with other prognostic factors such as serum albumin and functional status, can be used to help facilitate discussions with dialysis-dependent patients and their families regarding goals of care and end-of-life planning.ReferencesUnited States Renal Data System. Incidence and prevalence. Annual data report, 2006. Minneapolis, MN: USRDS Coordinating Center; 2006. Available at: http://www.usrds.org/2006/pdf/02_incid_prev_06.htm.Cohen LM, Moss AH, Weisbord SD, Germain MJ. Renal palliative care. J Pall Med. 2006; 9:977-992.Renal Physicians Association and American Society of Nephrology. Clinical Practice Guideline on Shared Decision-Making in the Appropriate Initiation of and Withdrawal from Dialysis. Washington, DC: Renal Physicians Association, 2000. Available at: http://jasn.asnjournals.org/cgi/content/full/11/7/1340.Ifudu O, Paul HR, Homel P, Friedman EA. Predictive value of functional status for mortality in patients on maintenance hemodialysis. Am J Nephrol. 1998; 18:109-116.Owen WF, Lew NL, Yiu Y, Lowry EG, Lazarus JM. The urea reduction ratio and serum albumin concentration as predictors of mortality in patients undergoing hemodialysis. NEJM. 1993; 329(14):1001-1006.Owen WF, Price D. African-Americans on maintenance dialysis. Adv Ren Replace Ther. 1997; 4:3-12.Lowrie EG, Lew NL. Death risk in hemodialysis patients. Am J Kidney Dis. 1990; 15:458-482.Beddhu S, Bruns FJ, Saul M, Seddon P, Zeidel ML. A simple comorbidity scale predicts clinical outcomes and costs in dialysis patients. Am J Med. 2000; 108:609-613.Miskulin DC, Martin AA, Brown R, et al. Predicting 1-year mortality in an outpatient hemodialysis population: a comparison of comorbidity instruments. Nephrol Dial Transplant. 2004; 19:413-420.Moss AH. A new clinical practice guideline on initiation and withdrawal of dialysis that makes Explicit the role of palliative medicine. J Palliat Med. 2000; 3:253-260.Nicolucci A, Cubasso D, Labbrozzi D, et al. Effect of coexistent diseases on Survival of patients undergoing dialysis. ASAIO J. 1992; 38:M291-M295.ACGME Competencies: Medical KnowledgeKeyword(s): Prognosis
#192 Palliative Care for Adults with Developmental DisabilitiesAuthor(s): Neil M Ellison MD and Drew A Rosielle MDIntroduction The life expectancy for adults with developmental disabilities (DD) is now within 5 years of the general population. This has resulted in an increased frequency of death from age related illnesses such as cancer, heart disease, and chronic lung disease. This Fast Fact will review special issues in the care of developmentally disabled people with life-limiting diseases.Fast Fact #193 will discuss decision making around life-threatening diseases for adults with DD.Background Adults with DD may be defined as persons with impaired social functioning and decreased ability (mild to profound) to comprehend new or complex information or to learn new skills. These disabilities begin prior to age 18. Examples include people with autism, Down syndrome, and cerebral palsy associated mental retardation. During the past decades there has been a move towards decreased institutionalization with mainstreaming of persons with DD to the community. Home care is often provided by elderly parents. Community housing may be supervised by individuals with little familiarity with the patient.Barriers to medical and palliative care for adults with DDSuboptimal nutrition, limited exercise, decreased utilization of health screening often negatively impact developmentally disabled people’s health.Communication barriers can lead to more advanced illness presentation.Lack of clarity of goals of care and poorly defined decision-makers (seeFast Fact #193 ).Developmentally disabled people may not be allowed appropriate bereavement: Deprived of the knowledge of death of their caregivers and loved ones.Excluded from funerals, memorial services, or other bereavement activities. Patient lack of comprehension of their illness, its symptoms, or its treatments: May interpret illness or treatments as punishment for wrong-doing.May not be able to understand death and why their family/caregivers are sad around them. Symptom assessment may be compromised by an inability to communicate: Individuals demonstrate a wide range of behaviors indicating discomfort, some of which may be subtle and only apparent to people who know them well, if at all.Signs of distress may be apparent even though it is unclear what is causing the distress: pain, other somatic symptoms, anxiety/fear, sadness? Providing effective palliative and supportive care to adults with DDWork closely with caregivers to maximize time in familiar surroundings, with familiar people and objects, in identifying routines and activities enjoyable to the patient, and in ways to offer emotional reassurance.Communicate about symptoms understandable to the patient, as opposed to abstract diseases. Symptom assessment and management (see alsoFast Fact #126 ):Research has supported the finding that symptom assessment needs to be individualized to the patient, based on the experience of a patient’s closest caregivers.DisDAT – a distress assessment tool – has been developed to help clinicians and caregivers identify, communicate about, and document an individual’s signs of distress and contentment (3,4).Symptom management should focus on careful examination of patterns of distress, a thorough physical examination, judicious use of diagnostic testing, and empiric use of comfort medications based on what is felt to be the most likely cause. Trial and error, with constant monitoring of adverse medication effects, is often necessary. ReferencesRead S. Learning Disabilities and Palliative Care: Recognizing Pitfalls and Exploring Potential. Intl J Palliat Nurs. 2003; 11:15-20.Tuffrey-Wijne I. The palliative care needs of people with intellectual disabilities: a literature review. Palliat Med. 2003; 17:55-62.Regnard C, Reynolds J, Watson B, et al. Understanding distress in people with severe communication difficulties: developing and assessing the Disability Distress Assessment Tool (DisDAT). J Intellect Disability Res. 2007;51:277-292. (Further discussion of and examples of DisDAT are available at: http://www.disdat.co.uk.)ACGME Competencies: Medical KnowledgeKeyword(s): Non-pain Symptoms and Syndromes, Other Neurological Disorders
#193 Decision Making for Adults with Developmental Disabilities Near the End-of-LifeAuthor(s): Neil Ellison MD and Drew Rosielle MDBackgorund This Fast Fact will address medical decision making for adults with developmental disabilities (DD) who are facing terminal or life-limiting diseases such as cancer, end-stage organ failure, or progressive debility. SeeFast Fact #192 for barriers to care and symptom assessment issues for persons with DD.Advance Care Planning Clinicians should elicit individual preferences regarding end of life care from adults with DD or their guardians early in the course of a disease. Early discussions of a disease’s likely course, as well as concerns such as cardiopulmonary resuscitation, mechanical ventilation, artificial nutrition, spiritual values, and place and circumstances of death may be helpful.Who decides? Many patients will have legal guardians (often, but not always, family members) who have decision-making responsibility. However, some adults with DD will be able to express their values and wishes which should be accommodated as much as possible by surrogates and clinicians. Non-guardian family members and caregivers often provide valuable insight and decisions should ideally be made by consensus of all interested parties. Guardians are obliged to act in the patient’s best interests; in the rare instance that clinicians suspect they are not doing so adult protective services or the courts need to be involved.On what grounds? Treatment decisions need to be made based on reasonable estimates of benefits vs. risks, with attention always to effects on the patient’s quality of life (QOL).Clinicians should be aware of their own biases in assessing a patient’s QOL. People with profound disabilities can lead rich lives, considered precious to them and those who love them. Surrogate decisions should be made by caregivers who know the patient well and attempt to view the QOL from the patient’s perspective.Define the risks/burdens of treatments for the patient: Will treatments be understood? Can the patient readily comply with the therapy or will restraints or sedation be necessary (e.g. to receive chemotherapy or undergo diagnostic studies)?Will treatments result in undue pain, suffering, or fear (hospitalization, IVs, nausea, vomiting, mucositis, diarrhea, or other side effects)?How will QOL be different after treatment (e.g. post -chemotherapy neuropathy, new functional deficits, change in place of residence due to health status)?Will remission or benefit be sustained long enough to warrant the duration of therapy? In emergency situations or in the absence of a decision maker, life-sustaining care should be the initial approach. However withdrawal or withholding of life-prolonging care is ethically appropriate if outcomes are either inconsistent with a patient’s values or goals (such as maintaining or improving QOL) or the burdens of treatment clearly outweigh any medical benefit. Clinicians should be aware of local regulations governing such decisions.CommunicationFind out as much about the patient as possible:“What is a normal day like for her?” “What sorts of activities seem to be enjoyable or meaningful him?” “What disturbs her?” Focus on goals:“If he could no longer enjoy X, what do you think he would want?” “Sounds like being at home – in familiar surroundings – is very important for her happiness. Is removing her from home frequently going to be worthwhile, even if she does live somewhat longer?” Make recommendations on your best understanding of the situation and likely outcomes.Avoid use of the term “futility” or language that otherwise seems to undervalue the patient’s life. Recognize that trust may need to be built with families due to prior incorrect predictions such as“Your baby will never live to be an adult,” “You will never be able to care for this child by yourself,” or“They will never have a meaningful life.” ReferencesLast Passages Project. End-of-Life Care for People with Developmental Disabilities: Philosophy and Recommendations. Available at: www.albany.edu/aging/lastpassages/index.htm. Accessed May 21, 2009.American Association on Intellectual and Developmental Disabilities. Position statement on Caring at the End of Life. June 2005. Available at: http://www.aamr.org/content_170.cfm?navID=31. Accessed May 21, 2009.Rehabilitation Research and Training Center on Aging with Developmental Disabilities. Available at http://www.rrtcadd.org/. Accessed May 21, 2009.ACGME Competencies: Medical KnowledgeKeyword(s): Non-Pain Symptoms and Syndromes
#194 Disclosing Medical ErrorAuthor(s): Ciarán Bradley MD and Karen Brasel MD, MPHBackground Discussing an adverse outcome related to medical error is challenging under the best of circumstances—for both the clinician and the patient or family. Errors can damage a clinician’s self-esteem, confidence, and reputation, and lead to costly and unpleasant legal action. Timely disclosure of error is now considered a standard of quality patient care. An empathic, open discussion can help restore trust while respecting a patient’s autonomy and right to justice. Hospice and Palliative Care clinicians may themselves be the source of medical error, or be asked to comment on other clinician’s actions by patients or families concerned that medical errors have led to a dying trajectory. This Fast Fact will address how to disclose error with a patient/family;Fast Fact #195 will discuss responding to a colleague’s error.Types of Error No single definition of error exists. For practical purposes error can be thought of being due to a) an isolated or series of clinician mistakes (providing care below a reasonable professional standard such as by failing to prescribe an indicated medication or injuring the common bile duct during routine cholecystectomy), b) a system failure (inadequate checks on pharmacy medication dispensing), or c) both. Unanticipated outcomes of medical care also occur and can be perceived as errors by patients/families even if not the consequence of a ‘mistake.’Discussing Error – PreparationWhoever committed the error (attending physician, advance practice nurse, or resident), the attending physician has final responsibility for the patient’s care and should lead the discussion. Invite trainees to attend – this is an important learning opportunity. Limit the discussion to just those healthcare professionals directly involved.Have the discussion in a timely manner – as soon as possible after the error is identified – but make sure the appropriate people are there (including an incapacitated patient’s legal decision maker). Set aside ample time and have the meeting in a distraction-free environment.Review the pertinent facts of the case so that you are prepared to answer any detailed questions that the patient/family might have.Discourage other consultants/ancillary staff from discussing the error with the patient/family – multiple accounts of the events will likely confuse rather than clarify.Notify and seek the advice of your institution’s risk manager. In addition to informing you of policies and procedures specific to your institution, they will then be aware of the case should legal inquiries be made.Note: while it is wise to seek risk management input, remember that discussing errors with patients/families is a clinical task – part of clinicians’ obligation to openly share medical information – not a legal task.Discussing Error – Content (seeFast Facts #6 ,11 for general breaking bad news principles)Be clear, concise, and honest. Avoid medical jargon or lengthy explanations.Give the patient and family time for questions, emotional reactions, or silence.If you believe the adverse outcome was a result of error (either individual or system-wide), specifically apologize for the error and its outcome.If the outcome was unanticipated, but not clearly avoidable express regret and sorrow. Avoid blame:“I am sorry this has happened” is not an admission of error or liability.Commit yourself and your institution to investigating and remedying any individual or systematic deficiencies.Commit to providing ongoing, appropriate care, including comfort-oriented care for a dying patient. Involve the appropriate services as indicated such as chaplaincy, social work, and consultants including palliative care.Document your discussion; refer legal inquiries to your institution’s risk manager. Discussing error requires professionalism and openness, sometimes at the expense of vulnerability. In addition to being an ethical imperative, it is a requisite skill and a key to maintaining a healthy clinician-patient relationship.ReferencesButcher L. Lawyers say “sorry” may sink you in court. Physician Exec. 2006; 32:20-24.Fallowfield L. Communication with the patient and family in palliative medicine. In: Doyle, D, et al, eds . Oxford Textbook of Palliative Medicine. New York, NY: Oxford University Press; 2004.Finkelstein D, Wu AW, Holtzman NA, Smith MK. When a physician harms a patient by a medical error: ethical, legal, and risk-management considerations. J Clin Ethics. 1997; 8:330-335.Gallaher TH, Studdert D, Levison W. Disclosing harmful medical errors to patients. N Engl J Med. 2007; 356:2713-2719.Hebert PC, Levin AV, Robertson G. Bioethics for clinicians: 23. Disclosure of medical error. CMAJ. 2001; 164: 509-513.Kraman SS, Hamm G. Risk management: extreme honesty may be the best policy. Ann Intern Med. 1999; 131:963-967.Straumanis JP. Disclosure of medical error: is it worth the risk? Pediatr Crit Care Med. 2007; 8:S38-S43.ACGME Competencies: Interpersonal and Communication Skills, ProfessionalismKeyword(s): Ethics, Law, Policy, Health Systems; Communication
#195 Responding to a Colleague's ErrorAuthor(s): Ciarán Bradley MD and Karen Brasel MD, MPHBackground When a physician makes an error that causes a patient harm, other physicians may be asked to explain the error or manage its consequences. Palliative care consultants may be involved to help provide terminal care and family support, or may be asked by families if a patient is dying as a result of error. We also have a professional duty to respond to a colleague’s error if we are concerned about them personally or about patient safety.Fast Fact #194 addressed disclosing an error to a patient or family. This Fast Fact will discuss responding to a colleague’s error.Case: You are the accepting trauma surgeon at a major referral center. A community surgeon who is a friend from residency transfers to you a 45-year-old man involved in a motorcycle crash for further care of a closed head injury. The patient is found to have an unrecognized lower extremity fracture and an associated vascular injury that, in your opinion, should have been recognized and treated. The resultant compartment syndrome evolves into a severe soft tissue infection, and despite amputation and serial debridements, the patient remains in septic shock with a grave prognosis. The patient’s family asks you if the outcome could have been avoided.Responding to error as a consultantReassure the family that they will have an honest and prompt explanation. Contact the referring doctor to learn all the details.If the referring physician agrees an error was made he or she should be encouraged to tell the patient/family directly. This may be impractical if the physician is from an outside institution.We have a duty to answer the patient’s/family’s questions honestly and to the best of our ability given the information at hand. Describe the facts as you know them, but without drawing conclusions or making value judgments about specific events in which you played no part. If asked, general statements about what constitutes usual standard of care are appropriate.Being purposefully vague or evasive during your explanation to the patient/family in order to spare the colleague is unethical. Affirm the patient’s/family’s right to open disclosure and refer them to the appropriate resources such as the hospital’s patient advocate.Responding to error as a colleague, mentor, and confidantApproach the colleague in a non-confrontational manner away from a public forum.“I have concerns about Mr. X’s care. Can you help me understand what happened?” Offer emotional support. Your colleague may feel tremendous guilt and self-doubt, and the shame from harming a patient may prevent your colleague from seeking help. Reassure them that excellent physicians can make serious errors, can have psychiatric or family problems, and can need remediation in their professional skills from time to time.Was this event a sign of a colleague experiencing “burn-out” (seeFast Facts #167 ,168 ,169 , and170 )? Help him or her identify and address professional or personal factors that are may be contributing (such as overwhelming practice load, relationship and family issues, depression, or substance abuse), as well as needed resources to address any problems.If appropriate, suggest the correct course of action in the future. This may be all the colleague needs to change practice. Offer to help with remediation: literature, courses, scrubbing together for the next few surgical cases.If there is any concern about the ongoing quality of medical care given by a colleague, most institutions have a peer review committee that can be contacted. In the case of substance abuse, most states and professional societies mandate the reporting of impaired physicians in a timely fashion in order to protect patients (see reference 5 below). Speaking with your institution’s risk manager may give you a better sense of what are your specific options as well as your specific state regulations.ReferencesHughes G: How are you? Are you ok? Do you want to talk? Emerg Med J. 2007; 24:236.Finkelstein D, Wu AW, Holtzman NA, Smith MK: When a physician harms a patient by a medical error: ethical, legal, and risk-management considerations. J Clin Ethics. 1997; 8:330-335.Wu AW, Folkman S, McPhee SJ, Lo Bernard: How house officers cope with their mistakes. West J Med. 1993; 159:565-569.Morreim EH: Am I my brother’s warden? Responding to the unethical or incompetent colleague. Hastings Cent Rep. 1993; 23:19-27.American Medical Association. Policy E-9.031: Reporting Impaired, Incompetent, or Unethical Colleagues. Available at: http://www.ama-assn.org/ama/upload/mm/369/report_39.htm. Accessed May 21, 2009.ACGME Competencies: ProfessionalismKeywords: Ethics, Law, Policy, Health Systems
#196 Bisphosphonates and Osteonecrosis of the JawAuthor(s): Rohtesh S Mehta MD and Marcin Chwistek MDIntroduction Osteonecrosis of the jaw (ONJ) is a potentially devastating complication associated with bisphosphonate therapy. In cancer, bisphosphonates are indicated for the treatment of malignant hypercalcemia and to prevent skeletal complications including pain, need for radiation therapy, and fractures in those with bone metastases (seeFast Fact #113 ). Drugs approved for use in cancer in the US include pamidronate and zoledronic acid.Epidemiology The reported incidence of ONJ in patients on bisphosphonates ranges from 1-11% in different studies, varying by type of bisphosphonate, patient population, and time-frame of surveillance. ONJ is mostly a disease of long-term intravenous bisphosphonate treatment; risk of developing ONJ depends on the duration and dose of therapy. There is a cumulative risk of ONJ of ~3% after 2 years and up to 11% after 4 years of exposure. Almost all (~94%) cases of ONJ occur in patients receiving intravenous bisphosphonate as compared to oral bisphosphonates. Other risk factors include:Prior radiation treatment to the head and neck.Periodontal disease or poorly fitting dentures.Dental procedures involving bone surgery.Caucasian race and age greater than 65 years.Diagnosis Symptoms of ONJ are localized pain, swelling, loosening of teeth, exposed bone, non-healing oral ulcers, purulent gingival discharge, and numbness or heaviness of the jaw. Signs of ONJ include local swelling, exposed bone on examination, and a radio-dense bony appearance on imaging studies. Differentiating ONJ from other oral diseases (alveolar osteitis, periodontitis, dental caries, sinusitis, osteonecrosis from radiation therapy, and recurrent or metastatic cancer) can be difficult, andearly involvement of an oral surgeon is important. If ONJ is suspected, imaging studies can help to rule out cysts, impacted teeth, or metastatic disease; however radiographic changes may be absent during early stages. A biopsy should be performed if metastatic cancer is suspected.Prevention All patients should have a complete dental examination with removal of any unsalvageable teeth prior to initiating bisphosphonate therapy. Patients should be well informed of the importance of good oral hygiene, regular dental follow-ups, and the avoidance of invasive dental procedures while on bisphosphonates.Instruct patients to let their dentists know they have received a bisphosphonate. Although empiric, stopping bisphosphonates for ~3 months before and after invasive dental procedures such as extractions has been recommended.Treatment Asymptomatic patients with exposed/necrotic bone can be managed with antibacterial mouth wash (e.g. chlorhexidine 0.12%) and followed up quarterly. Superficial debridement to relieve soft tissue irritation can also be performed. Oral antibiotics, in addition to antibacterial mouth washes, are indicated if there are signs of local infection. Severe ONJ manifested as a pathologic mandible fracture, extraoral fistulae, and/or osteolysis extending to the inferior border of the mandible necessitates surgical debridement. Pain management is often very challenging for these patients and best managed through an interdisciplinary approach including oral surgeons, pain management experts, psychologists, and others. There is no consensus about when it is appropriate to stop bisphosphonates, particularly with early ONJ. Brief interruption of therapy offers no benefit. Clinicians need to evaluate the benefits of initiating and continuing the use of bisphosphonates on an individual basis.ReferencesRuggiero S, Gralow J, Marx RE, et al. Practical guidelines for the prevention, diagnosis, and treatment of osteonecrosis of the jaw in patients with cancer. J Clin Oncol Practice. 2006; 2(1):7-14.Cavanna L, Bertè R, Arcari A, Mordenti P, Pagani R, Vallisa D. Osteonecrosis of the jaw. A newly emerging site-specific osseous pathology in patients with cancer treated with bisphosphonates. Report of five cases and review of the literature. Eur J Intern Med. 2007; 18(5):417-22.Weitzman R, Sauter N, and Eriksen EF, et al. Critical review: updated recommendations for the prevention, diagnosis, and treatment of osteonecrosis of the jaw in cancer patients--May 2006. Crit Rev Oncol Hematol. 2007; 62(2):148-52.Kademani D, Koka S, Lacy MQ, Rajkumar SV. Primary surgical therapy for osteonecrosis of the jaw secondary to bisphosphonate therapy. Mayo Clinic Proc. 2006; 81(8):1100-03.Advisory Task Force on Bisphosphonate-Related Ostenonecrosis of the Jaws, American Association of Oral and Maxillofacial Surgeons. American Association of Oral and Maxillofacial Surgeons position paper on bisphosphonate-related osteonecrosis of the jaws. J Oral Maxillofac Surg. 2007; 65(3):369-76. Available at: http://www.aaoms.org/docs/position_papers/osteonecrosis.htm.Myeloma Minute: Special Advisory on Osteonecrosis of the Jaws. International Myeloma Foundation. Available at: http://myeloma.org/main.jsp?type=article&tab_id=1&menu_id=0&id=1223. Accessed May 21, 2009.Diel IJ, Fogelman I, and Al-Nawas B, et al. Pathophysiology, risk factors and management of bisphosphonate-associated osteonecrosis of the jaw: Is there a diverse relationship of amino- and non-aminobisphosphonates? Crit Rev Oncol Hematol. 2007; 63:198-207.ACGME Competencies: Medical Knowledge, Patient CareKeywords: Non-Pain Symptoms and Syndromes
#197 Chemotherapy Associated Peripheral NeuropathyAuthor(s): Jagdeep K Mehr MD and Neil M Ellison MDBackground Chemotherapy associated peripheral neuropathy (CAPN) is a common dose-limiting toxicity of many anti-cancer agents. This Fast Fact will review the clinical features and treatment of CAPN.Etiology & Risk Factors CAPN is a common and expected part of treatment with the platins (cisplatin, oxaliplatin), vincristine, taxols (paclitaxel and docetaxel) and more recently with bortezomib. CAPN is less commonly seen with cytosine arabinoside, inteferons, procarbazine, and thalidomide. The risk of CAPN is higher in patients over 50 years old, heavy alcohol users, patients with renal or hepatic insufficiency, and those with preexisting neuropathies. The severity of CAPN is correlated with both cumulative and high single doses of the causative chemotherapeutic agent. The physiology of CAPN varies among different drugs and can involve damage to the neuron, vasa vasorum, or myelin sheath.Clinical FeaturesCAPN usually presents as a symmetric, axonal neuropathy, although focal and autonomic neuropathies can also occur. Symptoms usually begin within the first 3 cycles of chemotherapy, and may peak in severity up to 3 months after the drug is discontinued. Sensory symptoms generally improve over many months following discontinuation, but not in all patients; motor symptoms are less likely to improve.Symptoms include sensory (tingling, numbness, burning, peri-oral numbness), motor (foot, wrist drop, difficulty buttoning a shirt or holding a pen), autonomic (constipation), or myalgias or muscle cramps.Signs include loss of deep-tendon reflexes, sensory deficits (stocking glove distribution is most common), foot or wrist drop, or symmetric motor weakness.The most common pattern is an asymptomatic loss of deep tendon reflexes, progressing to a sensory, and finally motor neuropathy. Oxaliplatin can cause both an acute and chronic neuropathy. The acute process can begin during the drug infusion and include cold-induced paresthesias of the hands, feet, throat, and perioral area; the chronic form is a dose-dependent sensory neuropathy similar to other chemotherapy-induced neuropathies. Vincristine can cause pharyngeal myalgias (sore throat) and autonomic neuropathy manifested by constipation, in addition to a typical axonal neuropathy.Diagnosis is based on a history and neurological exam. Nerve conduction studies and electromyelography, while confirmatory, are usually not needed.Differential diagnosis includes direct tumor effects, non-chemotherapy induced neuropathies (e.g. postoperative, post-radiation, diabetic), or paraneoplastic syndromes.Prevention Early detection is key, allowing for dose reduction or drug discontinuation. Even after discontinuation, symptoms may progress for several months and then stabilize or slowly improve over a period of weeks to months. Neuroprotective agents including amifostine, vitamin E, glutamine, L-carnitine, and magnesium, have been proposed to prevent CAPN. There is currently no consensus on their use due to limited evidence and likely variable efficacy for different chemotherapies. Other protective measures advised to patients are to protect hands and feet from extremes of temperature (wearing socks, using gloves while cooking), routinely inspect for cuts or abrasions, and fall prevention education.Treatment No specific treatment exists to reverse CAPN, however pain should be treated symptomatically. There is little research to guide analgesic therapy, but clinical experience suggests treating this as any other painful peripheral neuropathy with adjuvant analgesics including gabapentin and pregabalin (see Fast Fact #49 ), tricyclic antidepressants such as amitriptyline, and serotonin-norepinephrine reuptake inhibitors such as duloxetine and venlafaxine (see Fast Fact #187 ). Opioids are recommended as a short-term treatment while waiting for an adjuvant to work, and for ongoing moderate to severe pain despite the use of adjuvant analgesics.ReferencesWalker M and Ni O. Neuroprotection during chemotherapy: A systematic review. Am J.Clin.Onc. 2007; 30:82-90.Albers J, Chaudhry V, Cavaletti G, Donehower R. Interventions for preventing neuropathy caused by cisplatin and related compounds. Cochrane Database of Systematic Reviews. 3, 2007, Issue 1. Art. No.: CD005228. DOI: 10.1002/14651858.CD005228.pub2.McDonald AA, Portenoy RK. How to use antidepressants and anticonvulsants as adjuvant analgesic in the treatment of neuropathic cancer pain. J Supportive Oncol. 2006; 4:43-52.Cata JP, et al. Clinical and experimental findings in humans and animals with chemotherapy induced peripheral neuropathy. Minerva Anesthesiologica. 2006; 72; 151-69.Wen PY, Plotkin SR. Neurologic complications of cancer chemotherapy. In: Rose BD, ed. UpToDate, Waltham, MA; UpToDate; 2007.Kirchmair W, et al. Antiangiogenesis mediates cisplatin-induced peripheral neuropathy: Attenuation or reversal by local Vascular Endothelial Growth factor Gene therapy without augmenting tumor growth. Circulation. 2005; 111(20):2662-2670.Wang, L et al. Oral glutamine is effective for preventing oxaliplatin-induced neuropathy in colorectal patients. Oncologist. 2007; 12(3):312-319.Faltters S, et al. Acetyl-L-carnitine prevents and reduces paclitaxel-induced painful peripheral neuropathy. Neuroscience Letter. 2006; 397:219-223.Kane RC et al. Velcade: U.S. FDA approval for the treatment of multiple myeloma progressing on prior therapy. Oncologist. 2003; 8(6):508-13.ACGME Competencies: Medical KnowledgeKeywords: Non-Pain Symptoms and Syndromes
#198 Regulatory Issues for Prescribing Schedule II Opioids at the End-of-LifeAuthor(s): Neil M. Ellison MDBackground Schedule II opioids (e.g. morphine, oxycodone, methadone, hydromorphone) play a major role in the management of symptoms at the end of life. Because of possible abuse, trafficking, and diversion of opioids, federal statutes mandate that appropriate safeguards be adhered to by prescribing clinicians and dispensing pharmacists. There are regulations that are important to understand for patients in hospice and long-term care settings, or who may have rapidly changing symptoms at home. This Fast Fact will review US federal regulations regarding prescribing Schedule II drugs. Note: a) some states may impose more restrictive regulations – check with your state licensing boards for specifics, and b) individual pharmacists may enforce these regulations with variable stringency.Prescription Information Prescriptions must be dated and signed on the day issued, and include the full name and address of the patient, the drug name, strength, quantity prescribed, and directions for use. The name, address, and Drug Enforcement Agency (DEA) registration number of the practitioner must also be included.Refills and Prescription Series Refills are not allowed on Schedule II opioids; however there are no federal regulations limiting the number of days a prescription can cover (many state or local professional standards have limited this to a 30 or 90 day supply). It is permissible to write a prescription series for up to a 90 day supply of medication. For example, at a single office visit a patient can be given 3 prescriptions, each for 30 days worth of the same drug, with two of the prescriptions noting: “Do not fill until [1 or 2 months, respectively, from the issue date].”Emergency prescriptions Emergency prescriptions can be phoned into a pharmacist. The pharmacist must make a reasonable effort to determine that the verbal authorization came from a registered practitioner and that the quantity prescribed and dispensed is limited to the amount adequate to treat the patient during the emergency period. This is often interpreted as a three day supply, but there is no regulation specifying how many days or doses constitute an emergency prescription. The prescribing clinician must quickly supply the pharmacy with a written prescription (postmarked within seven days if mailed). This prescription must have 'Authorization for emergency dispensing' written on it as well as the date of the verbal order.Facsimile prescriptions A facsimile prescription is sufficient for a Schedule II opioid used for direct parenteral administration (e.g. intravenous or spinal use), or for oral opioids for patients residing in a long-term care facility (LTCF) or who are receiving hospice care (even if at home). The script must note the patient’s status (e.g. “Resides in LTCF,” “Patient in hospice”).Partial dispensing Partial dispensing is allowed if the pharmacist is unable to supply the full quantity at one time. The remaining portion of the prescription must be filled within 72 hours. For patients in a LTCF or with a terminal illness, partial quantities up to 60 days from the issue date may be dispensed. The script must designate the patient is ‘terminally ill’ or in a LTCF.Pharmacist changes to prescriptions Pharmacists may independently add or change the patient’s address. After consultation with the prescriber, pharmacists may also add or change the dosage form, drug strength, drug quantity, directions for use, and issue date. While the aforementioned changes are permissible, many pharmacists will request a rewritten prescription.Patients with an addictive disease or in a drug treatment program Opioid addiction and pain can co-exist at the end of life. Clinicians approved for Schedule II prescribing by their DEA license can prescribe any Schedule II drug in the inpatient and outpatient settings for pain and symptom relief, even if the patient is enrolled in an opioid maintenance program. Clinicians are strongly advised to seek specialist help in these situations (from both pain and addiction specialists) as well as to work collaboratively with the patient’s treatment program.ReferencesChapter II--Drug Enforcement Administration, Department Of Justice, Part 1306: Prescriptions. U.S. Food and Drug Administration. Available at: http://www.accessdata.fda.gov/scripts/cdrh/cfdocs/cfcfr/CFRSearch.cfm?CFRPart=1306. Accessed November 29, 2007.General Questions and Answers. Drug Enforcement Administration Office of Diversion Control. Available at: http://www.deadiversion.usdoj.gov/faq/general.htm. Accessed November 29, 2007.Final Rule 2007 – Issuance of Multiple Prescriptions for Schedule II Controlled Substances. Drug Enforcement Administration Office of Diversion Control. Available at: http://www.deadiversion.usdoj.gov/fed_regs/rules/2007/fr1119.htm. Accessed November 29, 2007.Gilson AM, Joranson DE. The Federal Drug Enforcement Administration “Prescription Series” Proposal: Continuing Concerns. J Pain Palliat Care Pharmacotherapy. 2007; 21:21-24.Gilson AM, Joranson DE. Is the DEA’s new “Prescription Series” Regulation Balanced? Pain and Policy Studies Group. Available at: http://www.painpolicy.wisc.edu/DEA/Rx_Series_Adoption.htm. Accessed December 10, 2007.ACGME Competencies: Systems Based Practice, Patient CareKeywords: Pain - Opioids, Ethics, Law, Policy, Health Systems
#199 Opioids for CoughAuthor(s): Sean Marks MD and Drew A Rosielle MDBackground Cough is a common, and at times distressing, symptom. Up to 40% of advanced cancer patients report cough, and while a smaller percentage find their cough distressing, severe cough can lead to dyspnea, nausea/vomiting, sleep impairment, chest and throat pain, and impaired communication. This Fast Fact will focus on the use of opioids for the symptomatic treatment of cough.Fast Fact #200 will address other agents for cough.Etiologies & Evaluation Common etiologies of cough include infections of the upper and lower airway, asthma and COPD, lung cancer or lung metastases, interstitial pulmonary processes (such as lymphangitic tumor spread or pulmonary edema), gastroesophageal reflux, aspiration, and drugs. Common drug causes include ACE inhibitors, NSAIDs, and inhalant medications. Evaluating for reversible causes is appropriate if consistent with the goals of care and prognosis. If feasible, treatment should be directed at the underlying cause. Many patients however will benefit from symptomatic therapy for a distressing cough while waiting for acute therapy to work or have a chronic cough not amenable to treatment (e.g. cough due to advanced lung cancer).Opioids are the only clearly effective centrally-acting anti-tussive drugs and are thought to work by suppressing the brainstem cough center through mu and kappa opioid receptor agonism. They are the first-line symptomatic treatment for severe, distressing cough. All opioids used to treat cough have typical opioid side effects such as sedation, constipation, and nausea.Codeine: Duration of action is 4 hours; usual adult dose is 10-20 mg every 4-6 hours. It has shown to be effective for acute and chronic cough in several placebo-controlled trials. It is available alone or as an elixir with guaifenesin.Dextromethorphan: Duration of action 3-6 hours; usual adult dose is 10-20 mg every 4-6 hours. It is the most commonly used anti-tussive. Confirmed to be as effective as codeine for cough in multiple studies. It is available alone or as an elixir with guaifenesin. Note: dextromethorphan inhibits the cytochrome P450 system and thereby affects the metabolism of many drugs. Dextromethorphan can also cause a serotonin syndrome if used with serotonergic drugs such as antidepressants.Hydrocodone: Duration of action 4-6 hours; usual dose 5-10 mg every 4 hours. Hydrocodone is only available as a combination product in the US: as a short-acting elixir with the anticholinergic drug homatropine or as an extended release elixir with the antihistamine chlorpheniramine (dosed at 10 mg every 12 hours). These other agents magnify hydrocodone’s sedative effects, and limit the maximum dose a patient can take. Hydrocodone has been shown to be as effective as codeine in head to head studies but with fewer gastrointestinal side-effects. For this reason it is considered by many experts as the anti-tussive of choice (Homsi 2001).All opioid analgesics have anti-tussive activity and their use has been mostly based on convention; there is no strong evidence that any one opioid has superior efficacy for cough. For patients already taking opioids for pain, it is unclear whether adding a second opioid such as codeine for cough is effective. One uncontrolled, open-label study showed hydrocodone to be helpful in this setting; it has not been repeated (Homsi 2001).Fast Fact #200 will discuss non-opioid agents for cough, as well as address some general treatment strategies.ReferencesHomsi J, Walsh D, Nelson KA. Important drugs for cough in advanced cancer. Support Care Cancer. 2001; 9:565-74.Estfan B, LeGrand S. Management of cough in advanced cancer. J Support Oncol. 2004; 2:523-7.Von Gunten CF. Interventions to manage symptoms at the end of life. J of Pall Med. 2005; 8(1): 88-94.Adam J. Pan-Glasgow palliative care algorithm 2005 – Palliation of cough. Palliative Care Formulary 2nd Edition. Radcliffe Medical Press Ltd. 2002.Davis CL. ABC of palliative care: breathlessness, cough and other respiratory problems. BMJ. 1997; 315: 931-4.Homsi J, Walsh D, Nelson KA, Sarhill N, Rybicki L, LeGrand SB, Davis M. A phase II study of hydrocodone for cough in advanced cancer. Am J Hospice Palliat Care. 2002; 19:49-56.Turturro MA, Paris PM, Yealy DM, Menegazzi JJ. Hydrocodone versus codeine in acute musculoskeletal pain. Ann Emerg Med. 1991; 20:1100-03.Irwin RS. Complications of cough. Chest. 2006; 129:54S-58S.Homsi J, et al. Symptom evaluation in palliative medicine: patient report vs systematic assessment. Support Care Cancer. 2006; 14:444-453.Chung KF. Currently available cough suppressants for chronic cough. Lung 2008 [E-pub ahead of print, available Oct 2, 2007]. DOI: 10.1007/s00408-007-9030-1.ACGME Competencies: Medical KnowledgeKeywords: Non-Pain Symptoms and Syndromes
#200 Non-Opioid Anti-TussivesAuthor(s): Sean Marks MD and Drew A Rosielle MDBackground Cough is a common, and at times distressing, symptom.Fast Fact #199 discussed the use of centrally-acting drugs – opioids – for the symptomatic treatment of cough. This Fast Fact will address peripherally-acting agents.Controversies Commonly used prescription and over-the-counter anti-tussive formulations which contain some combination of antihistamines (e.g. diphenhydramine), a mucolytic (e.g. guaifenesin), and/or dextromethorphan are often used for acute cough due to upper respiratory infections and acute bronchitis. Evidence for these agents in the acute setting is poor (either no better than placebo or sweet syrup) and cannot be recommended. Due to concerns about inadvertent overdose and lack of efficacy, these products are now being actively discouraged for use in the pediatric setting.Peripherally-acting Anti-tussivesSweet syrups are commonly used as cough suppressants, whether as bases for prescription elixirs (such as codeine with guaifenesin) or home remedies (honey, simple syrup). The mechanism of action is unknown; some authors hypothesize it acts as a protective barrier to sensory receptors in the throat that heighten the cough reflex. A few controlled trials have shown sweet syrups reduce coughing in upper respiratory infections.Benzonatate inhibits cough by anesthetizing stretch receptors in the respiratory tract. Its duration of action is 3-8 hours; dosed at 100-200 mg three times a day. No published controlled studies confirm its effectiveness but multiple uncontrolled studies support its use. Side effects are uncommon but include sedation, headache, bronchospasm, and nausea. Expert opinion recommends adding it to an opioid.Antihistamines and anticholinergics are often part of combination anti-tussive elixirs with or without an opioid. Anticholinergics such as hyoscyamine and scopolamine are most helpful in the setting of copious upper respiratory secretions leading to cough. See Fast Fac t #109 for dosing information.Expectorants thin bronchial secretions and ease expectoration. Examples include guaifenesin (200-400 mg every 4 hours) and nebulized acetylcysteine or hypertonic saline. Empirically they have been recommended for severe, chronic, wet coughs. Because they may increase fluid in the respiratory tract, they are not recommended if the cough reflex is diminished.Nebulized local anesthetics are thought to work by anesthetizing afferent receptors in the respiratory tract. There have been no trials evaluating their effectiveness; anecdotally they have been reported to be effective for refractory cough. Published regimens include lidocaine 2% solution, 5 mL nebulized every 6 hours; and bupivacaine 0.25%, 5 mL nebulized every 8 hours. Bronchospasm is a potential side effect.Other agents such as bronchodilators and corticosteroids have not been shown to be effective apart from specific indications (e.g. for COPD or asthma exacerbations). Paroxetine, amitriptyline, gabapentin, and benzodiazepines have all been anecdotally reported to have efficacy in chronic, refractory cough.Recommendations Treatment for cough should be directed at the underlying cause if feasible and consistent with a patient’s prognosis and goals of care. When symptomatic treatment for a distressing cough is necessary, it is reasonable to start with an opioid product, adding benzonatate if needed. A trial of anticholinergics and expectorants for the indications described above is reasonable, but they should be stopped after a couple days if they have no effect. Sweet syrups appear to be helpful in upper respiratory infections; their role otherwise is uncertain. If these strategies fail to control distressing symptoms, other less studied approaches such as inhaled lidocaine are appropriate.ReferencesHomsi J, Walsh D, Nelson KA. Important drugs for cough in advanced cancer. Support Care Cancer. 2001; 9:565-74.Estfan B, LeGrand S. Management of cough in advanced cancer. J Support Oncol. 2004; 2:523-7.Von Gunten CF. Interventions to manage symptoms at the end of life. J of Pall Med. 2005; 8(1):88-94.Adam J. Pan-Glasgow palliative care algorithm 2005 – Palliation of cough. Palliative Care Formulary 2nd Edition. Radcliffe Medical Press Ltd. 2002.Davis CL. ABC of palliative care: breathlessness, cough and other respiratory problems. BMJ. 1997; 315:931-4.Sutton PP, Gemmell HG, Innes N, Davison J, Smith FW, Legge JS, Friend JA. Use of nebulised saline and nebulised terbutaline as an adjunct to chest physiotherapy. Thorax. 1988; 43(1):57-60.Irwin RS. Complications of cough. Chest. 2006; 129:54S-58S.Homsi J, et al. Symptom evaluation in palliative medicine: patient report vs systematic assessment. Support Care Cancer. 2006; 14:444-453.Lingerfelt BM, et al. Nebulized lidocaine for intractable cough near the end of life. J Support Oncol. 2007; 7:301-2.Chung KF. Currently available cough suppressants for chronic cough. Lung. 2008 [E-pub ahead of print, available Oct 2, 2007]. DOI: 10.1007/s00408-007-9030-1.Paul IM, Beiler J, McMonagle A, Shaffer ML, Duda L, Berlin CM. Effect of honey, dextromethorphan, and no treatment on nocturnal cough and sleep quality for coughing children and their parents. Arch Pediatr Adolesc Med. 2007; 161:1140-1146.Schroeder K, Fahey T. Systematic review of randomized controlled trials of over the counter cough medicines for acute cough in adults. BMJ. 2002; 324:1-6.Fuller RW, Jackson DM. Physiology and treatment of cough. Thorax. 1990; 45:425-30.Smith SM, SchroederK, Fahey T. Over-the-countermedications for acute cough in children and adults in ambulatory settings. Cochrane Database of Systematic Reviews 2008, Issue 1. Art. No.: CD001831. DOI: 10.1002/14651858.CD001831.pub3.ACGME Competencies: Medical KnowledgeKeywords: Non-Pain Symptoms and Syndromes
#201 Palliative Care for Patients with Huntington's DiseaseAuthor(s): Sean Marks MD, Serena Hung MD, and Drew A Rosielle MDBackground Huntington’s disease (HD) is an incurable neurodegenerative disorder inherited in an autosomal dominant fashion. It is characterized by progressive movement disorders, psychiatric manifestations, behavioral abnormalities, and cognitive impairment. This Fast Fact will focus on supportive and terminal care for patients with HD and their families.Natural History and PrognosisSymptom onset is usually between 33 and 44 years; subtle cognitive and motor changes may precede diagnosis by many years. Mean duration of illness from onset to death is 15-20 years with average age of death of 60 years; there are no proven therapies which slow the progression of HD.Patients show signs of progressive dementia and become unable to walk, talk, take in nutrition, and care for themselves. Life threatening complications may result from aspiration, chronic infections, poor nutrition, falls, or cardiovascular disease.~1/3 of all patients with HD are institutionalized in long-term care facilities.Impact on Families HD often begins during a time when family life is most complex and therefore most disruptive to the family structure (e.g. child-rearing, career development). Children can be particularly affected: distress is aggravated by concerns about their own genetic susceptibility, and as many as 40% of children of HD patients describe HD as splitting their family apart. Careful assessments of familial coping and psychosocial needs are an integral part of ongoing care for the HD patient.Common Symptoms and Supportive Care Patients are best served by an interdisciplinary team familiar with caring for patients with HD.Motor Manifestations. Abnormal involuntary movements include: chorea, dystonia, rigidity, bradykinesia, tremor, and myoclonus; other motor manifestations include gait and balance problems leading to frequent falls, slurred speech and swallowing difficulties First-line strategies are non-pharmacologic and include gait/balance training, speech therapy, and orthotics and leg weights to assist with upright posture.Chorea is the most frequently targeted symptom for pharmacologic therapy. Tetrabenazine (a dopamine depleting agent) has been shown to reduce chorea in a well-designed placebo controlled trial; it is undergoing approval in the US. Haloperidol and other antipsychotics are also used for chorea, although trials evaluating their effectiveness have shown mixed results. Psychiatric manifestations are present in over half of HD patients. Depression is a significant psychiatric problem and rates of suicide are higher in HD patients than the general population. Case reports support using tricyclic as well as newer antidepressants.Agitation is also common, and a small number of patients develop psychosis. Atypical neuroleptics are commonly used. Emotional lability (including episodes of extreme anger) can respond to propranolol.Low doses of scheduled benzodiazepines before meals or propranolol are used to control motor manifestations and anxiety related to eating.Establishing strict daily and hourly routines can help lessen anxiety, short-term memory deficits, intrusive thoughts, and fear of abandonment. Cognitive Deficits: gradual loss of memory and executive function are common. Consequently, increasing impairments in initiating movements and conversation occur. Yes/no questions may be preferable over open-ended questions when cognitive impairments become severe.Advance Care Planning Advanced care planning should be performed as early as possible, prior to cognitive impairment. Of particular importance is establishing a health care power of attorney, as well as documenting guidance to families for likely decisions they will face (such as tube feeding and mechanical ventilation). Some states require clear evidence that a patient would want tube feeding withheld or withdrawn at the end of life and patients should be instructed to document this if consistent with their wishes. See alsoFast Facts #12 ,65 ,162 , and178 for further discussion of advance care planning.Terminal Care Hospice services should be considered for all patients with advanced disease. There are no evidence-based criteria for determining a 6 month prognosis; web-based reference 13 however provides some guidance. Labored breathing, secretion management, and restlessness are common terminal symptoms –seeFast Facts #1 ,60 ,109 ,158 , and176 .ReferencesMoskowitz CB, Marder K. Palliative care for people with late-stage Huntington’s disease. Neurologic Clinics. 2001; 9(4):849-865.Bonelli RM, Wenning GK. Pharmacological management of Huntington’s disease: an evidence-based review. Curr Pharm Design. 2006; 12(21):2701-20.Huntington Study Group. Tetrabenazine as antichorea therapy in Huntington disease: a randomized controlled trial. Neurology. 2006; 66(3):366-72.Paulsen JS, Hoth KF, Nehl C, Stierman L. Critical periods of suicide risk in Huntington’s disease. Am J Psychiatry. 2005; 162(4):725-31.Folstein SE. Huntington’s disease: a disorder of families. Baltimore, MD: The Johns Hopkins University Press; 1989.Nance MA, Sanders G. Characteristics of individuals with Huntington’s disease in long-term care. Movement Disorders. 1996; 11:542-548.Sorensen SA, Fenger K. Causes of death in patients with Huntington’s disease and in unaffected first degree relatives. J Med Genet. 1992; 29:911-914.Lanska DJ, Lavine L, Lanska MJ, Schoenberg, BS. Huntington’s disease mortality in the United States. Neurology. 1988; 38:769.Myers RH, Sax DS, Koroshetz WJ, et al. Factors associated with slow disease progression in Huntington’s disease. Arch Neurol. 1991; 448:800-804.Mitchell S, Buchanan J, Littlehale S, Hamel M. Tube-feeding versus hand-feeding nursing home residents with advanced dementia: a cost comparison. J Am Med Direct Assn. 2003; 4(1):27-33.Vamos M, Hambridge J, Edwards M, Conaghan J. The impact of Huntington’s disease on family life. Psychosomatics. 2007; 48(5):400-404.Wong MT, Chang PC, Yu YL, et al. Psychosocial impact of Huntington’s disease on Hong Kong Chinese families. Acta Psychiatry Scand. 1994; 90:16-18.Hospice Eligibility Flipchart: Huntington’s Disease. VistaCare Inc. Available at: http://www.vistacare.com/eligibility/flipchart. Accessed December 7, 2007.Foroud T, Gray J, Ivashina J, Conneally PM. Differences in duration of Huntington’s disease based on age at onset. J Neurol Neurosurg Psych. 1999; 66:52-56.ACGME Competencies: Medical Knowledge, Patient CareKeywords: Communication, Non-Pain Symptoms and Syndromes
#202 Vertebroplasty and Kyphoplasty for Vertebral Compression Fractures, 2nd EditionAuthors: Marcin Chwistek MD and Rohtesh Mehta MDBackground Vertebral compression fractures (VCFs) occur in up to 20% of patients above the age of 50, mostly due to osteoporosis. Malignant VCFs are the result of osteolytic lesions from multiple myeloma or metastatic carcinoma and occur in up to 30% of patients with bone metastases. VCFs can cause significant acute and long-term pain, can compromise pulmonary function, and impair activities of daily living and mobility. Vertebroplasty (VP) and balloon Kyphoplasty (BKP) are minimally invasive surgical techniques used for treatment of both osteoporotic and malignant VCFs.Technique VP involves percutaneous injection of cement (polymethylmethacrylate - PMMA) into a fractured vertebral body. BKP involves inserting an inflatable balloon in the vertebral body first – to attempt to elevate the vertebral end plates – with subsequent insertion of PMMA. Both are outpatient procedures, done under conscious sedation and local anesthesia, with fluoroscopic guidance. Some clinicians will augment multiple levels at once.Patient Selection Careful correlation of a patient’s symptoms with the level of the fracture is important, as not all fractures are painful, and alternative causes of pain need to be considered. Patients with painful acute or chronic VCFs (only after neurological compromise has been ruled out) are appropriate for interventional consideration, although outcomes are slightly better in the acute setting. BKP is substantially more expensive than VP. Some practitioners empirically favor BKP in case of significant kyphosis (deformity more than 20°) or when VP is difficult due to posterior vertebral cortex involvement, which makes cement extravasation more likely. VP, on the other hand, is favored when insertion of balloon device is technically difficult due to severe vertebral collapse (> 65% reduction in vertebral height) or if the fracture is more than 3 months old, in which case elevation of the endplate is unlikely.Relative contraindications include the presence of any neurologic damage related to the fracture, fractures with a burst component (where bone fragments extend into the spinal canal), systemic or local infection, uncorrected hypercoagulable state, and severe cardiopulmonary disease.ComplicationsCement Extravasation is more common in VP (up to 40%, depending on the series) than in BKP (up to 13%). Cement leaks are rarely symptomatic.Pulmonary or neurologic emboli can occur from displaced bone marrow in <1% of cases.Infectious complications such as pyogenic spondylitis and osteomyelitis are very rare.Outcomes There is no trial comparing VP to BKP. Multiple randomized, unblinded, conservative therapy-controlled trials have shown VP/BKP to provide better pain relief than medical management of VCFs alone. Two RCTs comparing BKP vs non-surgical management in patients with osteoporotic (11) and cancer-induced VCFs (12) showed improvement in pain and function that were sustained for up to 12 months. A later RCT in osteoporotic VCFs showed VP to be more efficacious in reducing pain than conservative treatment (10).However , two blinded, randomized, sham-procedure controlled trials in patients with acute osteoporotic VCFs showed the efficacy of VP to be similar to controls who received a sham procedure (8,9). The injection of a local anaesthetic into the periosteum, which was common to both arms, may explain this finding. However, these studies were criticized for patient selection, low pain scores, insufficient amount of cement used and other methodological issues.Pain reduction occurs in 70-90% of cases with VP and in 67-100% in BKP; often more than a 5 point drop (on a 0-10 scale) in the immediate postoperative period, along with significant decrease in analgesic use at 1 month. Pain relief seems to be better in patients with osteoporotic VCFs as compared to those with malignant fractures; studies in cancer patients have shown an approximately 50-60% reduction in pain following intervention. BKP is reported to contribute to better long-term pain control (more than 2 years) than VP (73% vs. 41%, respectively); however, these data are not from a head-to-head comparison. Both BKP and VP lead to partial vertebral height restoration in selected patients. VP and BKP have also been found to be associated with significant reductions in pain-related depression, anxiety, drowsiness and fatigue in myeloma patients (13).Summary VP and BKP are effective analgesic interventions for painful VCFs in many patients, including cancer patients, and can be particularly helpful for patients who poorly tolerate opioids and other analgesics. Although understanding of the precise mechanism of action and precise indications are still evolving, these minimally invasive procedures should be considered as a part of a multidisciplinary approach to patients with painful VCFs. The choice of the vertebral augmentation procedure for a patient with either benign or malignant VCF is still largely guided by the experience of the practitioner performing the procedure. Patients taking opioids should be evaluated carefully after VP or BKP, as they may need dose reductions.ReferencesDiamond TH, Bryant C, Browne L, et.al.Clinical outcomes after acute osteoporotic vertebral fractures: a 2-year non-randomised trial comparing percutaneous vertebroplasty with conservative therapy.Med J Aust . 2006; 184:113–117.Hulme PA, Krebs J., Ferguson SJ, et al., Vertebroplasty and kyphoplasty: a systematic review of 69 clinical studies.Spine . 2006; 31:1983–2001.Taylor RS, Taylor RJ, Fritzell P. Balloon kyphoplasty in the management of vertebral compression fractures: an updated systematic review and meta-analysis.Spine. 2006; 31(23):2747-55.Pateder DB, Khanna AJ, Lieberman IH. Vertebroplasty and kyphoplasty for the management of osteoporotic vertebral compression fractures.Orthop Clin North Am. 2007; 38(3):409-18.Melton LJ 3rd, Kallmes DF. Epidemiology of vertebral fractures: implications for vertebral augmentation.Acad Radiol. 2006; 13(5):538-45.Khanna AJ, Reinhardt MK, Togawa D, Lieberman IH. Functional outcomes of kyphoplasty for the treatment of osteoporotic and osteolytic vertebral compression fractures.Osteoporos Int. 2006; 17(6):817-26.Jensen ME, McGraw JK, Cardella JF, Hirsch JA. Position statement on percutaneous vertebral augmentation: a consensus statement developed by the American Society of Interventional and Therapeutic Neuroradiology, Society of Interventional Radiology, American Association of Neurological Surgeons/Congress of Neurological Surgeons, and American Society of Spine Radiology.Am J Neuroradiol. 2007; 28(8):1439-43.Kallmes DF, Comstock BA, Heagerty PJ, Turner JA, et al. A randomized trial of vertebroplasty for osteoporotic spinal fractures.N Engl J Med . 2009 Aug 6;361(6):569-79.Buchbinder R, Osborne RH, Ebeling PR, Wark JD,, et al. A randomized trial of vertebroplasty for painful osteoporotic vertebral fractures.N Engl J Med . 2009 Aug 6;361(6):557-68.Klazen CA, Lohle PN, de Vries J, Jansen FH, et al. Vertebroplasty versus conservative treatment in acute osteoporotic vertebral compression fractures (Vertos II): an open-label randomised trial.Lancet. 2010 Sep 25;376(9746):1085-92.Wardlaw D, Cummings SR, Van Meirhaeghe J, et al. Efficacy and safety of balloon kyphoplasty compared with non-surgical care for vertebral compression fracture (FREE): a randomised controlled trial.Lancet . 2009 Mar 21;373(9668):1016-24.Berenson J, Pflugmacher R, et al; Cancer Patient Fracture Evaluation (CAFE) Investigators. Balloon kyphoplasty versus non-surgical fracture management for treatment of painful vertebral body compression fractures in patients with cancer: a multicentre, randomised controlled trial.Lancet Oncol . 2011 Mar;12(3):225-35.Mendoza TR, Koyyalagunta D, Burton AW, et al. Changes in pain and other symptoms in patients with painful multiple myeloma-related vertebral fracture treated with kyphoplasty or vertebroplasty.J Pain . 2012 Jun;13(6):564-70.Authors’ Affiliations: Fox Chase Cancer Center, Philadelphia, PA (MC); University of Pittsburgh Medical Center, Pittsburgh, PA (MR).
#203 Managing One's Emotions as a ClinicianAuthor(s): Donna Posluszny PhD and Robert Arnold MDBackground It is normal for clinicians to experience an array of emotions when interacting with ill patients and their families. Although positive emotions such as joy and satisfaction are rarely problematic, negative emotions such as anger or sadness may interfere with your ability to communicate empathically or even to provide appropriate medical care. This Fast Fact focuses on clinicians’ emotional responses to patient care. See alsoFast Facts #59 ,167 ,168 ,169 ,170 , and172 for more on responding to anger, clinician burnout, and professional boundaries.Sources of Emotion Some of the emotions we experience are direct reactions to what the patient is saying or doing (e.g. an angry patient may trigger our own anger). Difficult emotions may also arise when patients do not act in ways that we like (e.g. feeling frustrated when a patient is not taking medication as prescribed). We may feel sad, helpless, or even guilty when we cannot prevent a patient from further illness or death. We may also experience emotions triggered by our own past experiences, such as a patient who reminds us of a family member (e.g. grief, longing).Strategies for managing difficult emotions Dealing with one’s emotions is a learned skill. Like all skills it takes time and practice. Be patient and keep practicing – look at each experience as a learning opportunity.Prior to an interaction you anticipate will be difficult specifically identify what is causing your emotional response. Was it the patient’s health behavior, their behavior towards you, their intense emotions, or your own sadness about their condition? If your emotional response is based on your past, acknowledge this and put it aside during the upcoming interaction.Practice the interaction ahead of time. Imagine the most likely ways that the patient will react and how you will respond. Clarify your goals. It is unrealistic to expect that you can prevent or control patients from experiencing difficult emotions, especially anger and grief. Acknowledge this and focus on realistic goals: being empathic, listening, disclosing medical information, talking patients through options, and validating their emotions.Don’t go it alone. Bring along a colleague or team member who can help if you have trouble controlling your emotions and can give you feedback on what might work better next time. During the interaction recognize when your emotions are impacting your thinking/communicating: Increased heart rate; feeling flushed, sweating; shallow, rapid breathing; increased muscle tension; speaking rapidly or loudly; repeating yourself; or realizing you are not listening. If you are experiencing intense negative emotions:Give yourself and the patient time to allow emotional intensity to subside. Listen, rather than speak; allow silence.Validate the patient’s experience by naming their emotions (‘You seem frustrated’). If you are not sure, pose it as a question (’Are you feeling frustrated?’). Besides being empathic, simply naming what is happening may attenuate your own emotional response.Naming your own emotions is appropriate as long as it does not divert attention from the patient’s needs or put blame on the patient. For example you might say, “I am feeling frustrated that there is not more we can do to help you.” If you are feeling overwhelmed , it is appropriate to say, “Please excuse me for one moment” and then step outside the room; resume your interaction once composed. Most patients appreciate certain displays of clinician emotion (e.g. tears), if they occur at appropriate times and are consonant with the tenor of the interaction.However, losing control of one’s emotions, including grief (sobbing), is never appropriate in front of patients and clinicians should excuse themselves prior to doing so. Afterwards, debrief with a trusted colleague or team member about what happened, how you responded, and how you might do it differently next time. A less emotionally involved person can often see things in the interaction that you cannot. Students and residents might ask faculty to come with them the next time they interact with the patient. Repeated episodes of emotional instability may be a sign of burnout and/or need for mental health counseling.ReferencesMeier D, Back A, Morrison RS. The inner life of physicians and care of the seriously ill. JAMA. 2001; 286(23):3007-3014.Halpern, J. Empathy and patient-physician conflicts. J Gen Int Med. 2007; 22(5):696-700.Back A, Arnold R, Baile W, Tulsky J, Fryer-Edwards K. Approaching difficult communication tasks in oncology. CA, A Cancer Journal for Clinicians. 2005; 55:164-177.ACGME Competencies: Interpersonal and Communication Skills, ProfessionalismKeywords: Communication, Psychosocial and Spiritual Experience: Patients, Families, and Clinicians
#204 African Americans and End-of Life CareAuthor(s): Mythili Raghavan, Alexander Smith MD, MS, and Robert Arnold MDBackground The care African Americans receive at the end-of-life, as well as African Americans’ attitudes towards end-of-life care, differ in some ways from the general US population. Clinicians’ poor understanding of these differences may lead to ineffectual communication and patient dissatisfaction. This Fast Fact outlines research findings on differences in end-of-life care and values between African Americans and the population as a whole.Note: the differences discussed here represent broad trends and the full spectrum of values and practices within African American communities is diverse and not captured by the following discussion. Clinicians are advised not to make assumptions about individual patients based on population data, and to always explore each patient’s values and wishes.End-of-Life Practices With respect to European American cohorts, African Americans are:Less likely to complete advance directives (14, 19), enroll in hospice (15), receive appropriate symptom management at the end-of-life (3, 9), or be satisfied with the quality of end-of-life care and communication (20).More likely to receive aggressive treatment at the end-of-life (including artificial nutrition and hospitalization) (2, 4, 5, 16), to stop hospice care to seek life-prolonging treatment (11), and to die in a hospital (6, 13). Over recent decades, while there have been more opportunities for patients to die outside of hospitals, rates of in-hospital deaths have declined for European Americans; a similar decrease has not been observed for African Americans (8).Reasons for these differences have been researched extensively and likely include:Preferences/Values – In general African Americans are more likely to want life-prolonging and aggressive treatments; to associate treatment limitations and hospice care with ‘giving up;’ and have less interest in completing advance directives (relying more on verbal communication of their wishes with family) (6, 9, 10, 18). These differences are not solely due to mistrust or educational and economic status (similar trends are seen with African American physicians) (3), although they can be attenuated by explicit advance care planning in some instances (19). They likely also reflect deep cultural values stemming in part from the strong religious faith of many African Americans; for instance a trust that ‘death is in God’s hands’ may underlie a reluctance to discuss or plan for terminal care needs (3, 10, 12).Health Care Disparities and Trust – Historic and current racism and health care inequalities, and the resultant mistrust of health care providers and institutions, likely drive these differences as well (3). African Americans are less likely to be offered hospice care and pharmacies in minority neighborhoods are less likely to stock opioid analgesics (1, 3). There is some evidence that differences in end-of-life care are attenuated where health care is distributed more equitably (such as in the Veterans Health Administration) (7).Recommendations for CommunicationAsk the patient and family about their perspectives about end-of-life care and decision-making prior to making recommendations.Have you thought about getting sicker? What happened when your dad got sick and died? Are you the kind of person who makes decisions on your own or do you want your family to be involved? This allows you to understand the patient’s/family’s beliefs about end-of-life care and make suggestions that are consistent with their values (see also Fast Facts #17 and26 ).Ask about spirituality and religious beliefs (seeFast Fact #19 ). Offer to involve a chaplain or the patient’s personal spiritual advisor.Frame the discussion positively. Focus on meeting shared goals, not on what you are not going to do.I want to help you live as best you can, given how sick you are becoming. Look for issues of trust and address them openly. Seek to understand any mistrust, avoid labeling the patient (e.g. as ‘irrational’), and redress any grievances within your power. Build trust through offering time, careful communication, and close follow-up.If there is conflict, recognize that we all bring our own values and culture to the bedside, and our conception of what constitutes a ‘good death’ may genuinely differ from our patients’. Seek shared goals and values, focused on the needs of the patient, and recommend what you feel is the best medical care for a patient given their prognosis, options, and goals.ReferencesBernabei R, Gambassi G, Lapane K, Landi F, Gatsonis C, Dunlop R, Lipsitz L, Steel K, Mor V. Management of pain in elderly patients with cancer. SAGE Study Group. Systematic Assessment of Geriatric Drug Use via Epidemiology. JAMA. Jun 1998; 279 (23):1877-82.Braun UK, Rabeneck L, McCullough LB, et al. Decreasing use of percutaneous endoscopic gastrostomy feeding for veterans with dementia – racial differences remain. J Am Geri Soc. 2005; 53:242-248.Crawley L, Payne R, et al. Palliative and end-of-life care in the African American Community. JAMA. 2000; 284:2518-2521.Degenholtz HB, Thomas SB, Miller MJ. Race and the intensive care unit: disparities and preferences for end-of-life care. Crit Care Med. 2003; 31(5 Suppl):S373-S378.Earle CC, Neville BA, Laundrum MB, et al. Trends in the aggressiveness of cancer care near the end of life. J Clin Oncol. 2004; 22:315-321.Etienne Phipps, Gala True, Diana Harris, Umi Chong, William Tester, Stephen I. Chavin, Leonard E. Braitman. Approaching the End of Life: Attitudes, Preferences, and Behaviors of African-American and White Patients and Their Family Caregivers. Journal of Clinical Oncology. Feb 2003; 21(3):549-554.Fischer SM, Kutner JS, et al. Lack of ethnic differences in end-of-life care in the Veterans Health Administration. Am J Hospice Palliat Med. 2007; 24:277-283.Fiory J, Yinong YX, Gurol I, Levinsky N, Ash A, Emanuel E. Place of death: US trends since 1980. Health Aff (Millwood). May-Jun 2004; 23(3):194-200.Hopp FP and Duffy SA. Racial variations in end of life care. J Am Geriatr Soc. Jun 2000; 48(6):658-63.Jenkins C, Lapelle N, Zapka JG, Kurent JE. End of life care and African Americans: voices from the community. J Palliat Med. Jun 2005; 8(3):585-92.Johnson KS, et al. Racial Differences in Hospice Revocation to Pursue Aggressive Care. Archives of Internal Medicine. 2008; 168(2):218-224.Johsnon KS, Elbert-Avila KI, Tulsky JA. The influence of spiritual beliefs and practices on the treatment preferences of African Americans: a review of the literature. J Am Geri Soc. 2005; 53:711-719.Johnson KS, Kuchibhatala M, Sloane RJ, Tanis D, Galanos AN, Tulsky JA. Ethnic differences in the place of death of elderly hospice enrollees. J Am Geriatr Soc. 2005; 53(12):2209-15.Lahn M, Friedman B, Bijur P, Haughey M, Gallagher EJ. Advance directives in skilled nursing facility residents transferred to emergency departments. Acad Emerg Med. 2001; 8(12):1158-62.Ludke RL and Smucker DR. Racial differences in the willingness to use hospice services. J Palliat Med. 2007; 10(6):1329-37.Mor V, Papandonatos G, Miller SC. End of life hospitalization for African-American and non-Latino white nursing home residents: variations by race and a facility’s racial composition. J Palliat Med. 2005; 8(1):58-68.Sambamoorthi U, Walkup J, McSpiritt E, Warner L, Castle N, Crystal S. Racial differences in end-of-life care for patients with AIDS. AIDS Public Policy. 2000; 15(3-4):136-48.Torke AM, Garas NS, Sexson W, Branch WT. Medical care at the end of life: views of African-American patients in an urban hospital. J Palliat Med. 2005; 8(3):593-602.Volandes A, Paasche-Orlow M, Gillick M, et al. Health literacy not race predicts end-of-life care preferences. J Palliat Med. 2008 (in press).Welch LC, Teno JM, Mor V. End of life care in black and white: race matters for medical care for dying patients and their families. J Am Geriatr Soc. 2005; 53(7):1145-53.ACGME Competencies: Interpersonal and Communication Skills, ProfessionalismKeywords: Communication, Psychosocial and Spiritual Experience: Patients, Families, and Clinicians
#205 Destination Ventricular Assist Devices for Heart FailureAuthor(s): Heather Ferris MD, PhD and Susan Hunt MDIntroduction About 250,000 Americans have end-stage heart failure (‘Class IV’ by the New York Heart Association criteria, meaning patients cannot carry out any physical activities without discomfort and experience dyspnea or angina at rest). Fewer than 1% of patients, however, will receive a heart transplant. The left ventricular assist device (LVAD) was initially designed as an implanted mechanical circulatory support to extend the life of patients awaiting heart transplants (“bridge therapy”). In 2002, the FDA approved the LVAD not only as “bridge therapy”, but also as an alternative to transplantation, or “destination therapy.”The Technology The LVAD is a surgically implanted pump with two conduits, one of which is implanted in the left ventricle, the other into the aorta. Blood is pulled from the left ventricle, and pumped into the aorta, increasing cardiac output and reducing heart failure symptoms. A third conduit passes from the pump through the abdominal wall, and attaches to the LVAD’s battery and control system. Right and bi-ventricular assist devices also exist, but are not currently approved for destination therapy. Patients can go home on most types of assist devices. LVAD patients may use a wearable battery system for several hours, which allows them more maneuverability. To qualify for destination LVAD therapy, a patient must have refractory Class IV heart failure, severe systolic dysfunction (ejection fraction <25%), inotrope dependence or very low peak oxygen consumption ( <12 ml/kg/min), and sufficient body surface area to accommodate the LVAD.OutcomesLVADs can prolong life. REMATCH, a randomized controlled trial, compared destination LVAD therapy to medical therapy. LVAD patients had 1-year and 2-year survivals of 52% and 29% respectively, compared to 25% and 13% for medically managed patients. The mean survival for LVAD patients was 14 months, compared to 9 months for medically managed patients. Depression and health-related quality of life were improved in LVAD recipients.Shorter survival is predicted by poor nutritional status, low serum albumin, coagulation abnormalities, impaired renal function, and signs of right heart failure. A pre-operative risk model has been developed using these factors (Lietz 2005); using this model, the 90-day and 1-year survival for low-risk patients is 93% and 81% respectively, compared to 18% and 11% for high-risk patients.Complications of LVAD therapy include stroke, multi-organ failure, bleeding, thromboembolic disease, and sepsis. Peri-operative mortality is very high (33%). Patients generally spend 20% of their survival time in the hospital. Some patients can perform all activities of daily living, but anxiety among patients and caregivers may be significant. LVAD alarms, which occur an average of 6.7 times daily, are particularly distressing.Discontinuing LVADs and Care Planning LVADs may be implanted as a bridge to transplantation, but later become destination therapy when patients are no longer transplantation candidates. In the rare instance of left ventricular recovery, LVADs can be explanted. More often, LVADs are removed at cardiac transplantation or, in the case of destination therapy, when severe complications arise. When the LVAD is turned off, not only does support to the damaged heart stop, but the non-functioning device causes impediment to the pumping of the native heart, thus in a small way hastening death. Patients usually die rapidly after device discontinuation. Discussions leading to a decision to discontinue the LVAD should focus on its inability to continue to fulfill its intended goals, and the importance of providing comfort care for a dying patient. LVAD therapy is a surgical therapy which can prolong life and improve function in selected patients, but is associated with very high mortality and treatment burden. Discussions with patients and surrogates to clarify prognosis, goals, and endpoints for LVAD therapy should take place before implantation. These discussions should address the quality of life below which a patient would no longer want to continue mechanical circulatory support, and would want to initiate comfort-only care. Palliative care physicians may be involved in these discussions, and involved in evaluating patients who have suffered complications or request LVAD discontinuation.ReferencesLietz K et al. Outcomes of Left Ventricular Assist Device Implantation as Destination Therapy in the Post-REMATCH Era; Implications for Patient Selection. Circulation. 2007; 116:497-505.Park SJ et al. Left Ventricular Assist Devices as Destination Therapy: A New Look at Survival. J Thorac Cardiovasc Surg. 2005; 129:9-17.Rose EA et al. Randomized Evaluation of Mechanical Assistance for the Treatment of Congestive Heart Failure (REMATCH) Study Group: Long-term Use of a Left Ventricular Assist Device for End-stage Heart Failure. N Engl J Med. 2001; 345:1435-1443.Bramstedt KA, Wenger NS. When Withdrawal of Life-Sustaining Care Does More Than Allow Death to Take Its Course: The Dilemma of Left Ventricular Assist Devices. J Heart Lung Transplant. 2001; 20:544-548.Slaughter MS et al. Home Discharge Experience With the Thoratec TLC-II Portable Driver. ASAIO Journal. 2007; 53:132-135.Author Affiliations: University of Pittsburgh Medical Center.ACGME Competencies: Medical Knowledge, Patient CareKeywords: Non-Pain Symptoms and Syndromes
#206 Genetic Screening and DNA Banking at the End-of-LifeAuthor(s): John M Quillin PhD, Joann N Bodurtha MD, and Thomas J Smith MDBackground Many dying patients voice concern for the health of surviving family members (1,2). The most common causes of death can cluster in families, and this clustering can reflect shared family genes. About 5% to 10% of cancers are strongly hereditary (3) and a family history of heart disease is well established as a risk factor for the disease (4-6). Family members may benefit from knowing their genetic risk, and offering testing can be a generative act for a dying patient. Today’s genetic tests can identify known markers of disease for only some families, so testing is most helpful if it includes the affected patient (otherwise ‘negative’ test results are less informative). In addition, more informative genetic tests will likely be available in the future. Once patients die, however, their DNA is no longer readily available for this future testing. On the other hand, decisions about genetic testing are complex and can have profound emotional, familial, and financial impacts on those affected and should not be pursued hastily.Possible Genetic Conditions If a patient or family member asks if survivors could be affected by the patient’s disease, consider recommending genetic testing or banking for known genetic disorders (e.g. hemochromatosis, cystic fibrosis) and in the following settings:Earlier-than-expected age at diagnosis (e.g. breast cancer before age 50)Multiple primary cancers (e.g. a history of both colon and ovarian cancer)A major birth defect (e.g. spina bifida, congenital heart defect) or multiple minor physical anomaliesProfound hearing or vision loss without an environmental explanationDevelopmental disability or autismDisorders of sexual developmentUnusually tall or short stature compared to relativesUnusual skin pigmentation, such as ≥6 café-au-lait spots, or lumps (e.g., multiple lipomas)Congenital myopathy or muscular dystrophyCardiomyopathy or arrhythmia without clear cut cause, or at an age earlier than expectedSuspected connective tissue disease (e.g. hyperflexibility)Excessive bleeding or clotting tendencies not associated with medication or comorbiditySeizures without an identifiable etiologyTalking to Patients and Families There is no consensus on who should be approached for discussion of familial risk, and to date no studies on effective communication strategies for genetic screening at the end of life are available, despite acknowledgment of a practice gap (7-9). In practice, a straightforward invitation for discussion of the topic may be effective: “I’d like to talk with you about your family health history. Some health conditions tend to run in families and knowing your health history and seeing if it is connected to your illness could help others in your family to stay healthy. Most diseases are not strongly genetic, but sometimes it is helpful to have a genetic test or store a blood sample for testing later.”Genetic counselors, medical geneticists, and genetic nurses can facilitate comprehensive genetics evaluation, assist in test selection, provide informed consent, and educate patients and family members about indications for and costs of testing and banking. Genetic consultation is usually covered by major insurers and Medicare, especially for patients with active disease such as cancer.DNA Banking Banking involves drawing blood for long-term storage at a DNA banking facility. DNA banking is typically not covered by insurance; costs vary from one to a few hundred dollars. Facilities offering DNA banking vary in their informed consent requirements and documentation for ownership of samples (e.g. who is authorized to submit a sample to a laboratory for genetic testing). Banking can be particularly helpful considering turn-around-time for genetic test results can be long and more informative tests may become available in the future. In addition, given the complex and emotional decision making that can be involved in genetic testing, banking gives family members time to seek counseling and to carefully consider such decisions, without feeling pressure to pursue testing before a loved one dies.Resources Clinical laboratories that currently offer DNA banking can be found athttp://www.genetests.org . Providers can search for nearby genetic counselors and geneticists athttp://www.nsgc.org andhttp://www.acmg.net . General resources for clinicians about genetic counseling and testing can be found in references 10-13.ReferencesDuggleby W, Wright K. Elderly palliative care cancer patients' descriptions of hope-fostering strategies. Int J Palliat Nurs. 2004; 10:352-359.Skirton H, Frazier LQ, Calvin AO, Cohen MZ. A legacy for the children--attitudes of older adults in the united kingdom to genetic testing. J Clin Nurs. 2006; 15:565-573.Offit K. Clinical Cancer Genetics. New York: Wiley-Liss, Inc.; 1998.Hunt SC, Gwinn M, Adams TD. Family history assessment: Strategies for prevention of cardiovascular disease. Am J Prev Med. 2003; 24:136-142.Murabito JM, Pencina MJ, Nam BH, et al. Sibling cardiovascular disease as a risk factor for cardiovascular disease in middle-aged adults. JAMA. 2005; 294:3117-3123.Lloyd-Jones DM, Nam BH, D'Agostino RB S, et al. Parental cardiovascular disease as a risk factor for cardiovascular disease in middle-aged adults: A prospective study of parents and offspring. JAMA. 2004; 291:2204-2211.Kirk J. The family history of cancer - a common concern in palliative care. Progress in Palliative Care. 2004; 12:59-65.Lillie AK. Exploring cancer genetics and care of the family: An evolving challenge for palliative care. Int J Palliat Nurs. 2006; 12:70-74.Quillin JM, Bodurtha JN, Smith TJ. Genetics assessment at the end of life: Suggestions for implementation in clinic and future research. J Palliat Med. 2008; 11:451-458.Pletcher BA, Toriello HV, Noblin SJ, et al. Indications for genetic referral: A guide for healthcare providers. Genet Med. 2007; 9:385-389.American Society of Clinical Oncology. American society of clinical oncology policy statement update: Genetic testing for cancer susceptibility. J Clin Oncol. 2003; 21:2397-2406.Genetics and Your Practice. March of Dimes. Available at: http://marchofdimes.com/gyponline/index.bm2. Accessed July 10, 2008.National Office of Public Health Genomics. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. Available at: http://www.cdc.gov/genomics/. Accessed July 10, 2008.Authors’ Affiliation: Massey Cancer Center, Virginia Commonwealth University, Richmond, VA.ACGME Competencies: Medical Knowledge; Interpersonal and Communications SkillsKeywords: Ethics, Law, Policy Health Systems; Communication
#207 Withdrawl of Dialysis: Decision MakingAuthor(s): Sara N Davison MD and Drew A Rosielle MDBackground Historically, stopping dialysis was considered by many to be a form of suicide. However, it is now a widely accepted practice in most countries, with broad ethical and legal consensus that dialysis can be stopped when it is no longer achieving a meaningful goal for the patient. In fact, ~25% of deaths of dialysis patients in North America occur after its cessation. This Fast Fact reviews key issues pertaining to the decision to stop chronic dialysis;Fast Fact #208 will discuss the care of patients after it is stopped.Why dialysis is stopped The goal of dialysis is not only to prolong life by providing renal replacement therapy, but to maintain a patient’s quality of life at an acceptable level (seeFast Fact #163 ).Discussions to stop dialysis usually occur when:Dialysis is no longer serving to substantially prolong life or is only prolonging a patient’s death (e.g., a patient dying from advanced cancer or sepsis with multiorgan system failure).The burdens of dialysis and its complications outweigh its life-prolonging benefits to a patient (e.g., a patient with progressive frailty who is becoming bedbound, a patient with severe cognitive failure). In these scenarios dialysis is likely to prolong life but is not helping to restore a patient to an acceptable level of quality of life as assessed by the patient or her/his surrogate decision maker.Demographics The demographics of dialysis withdrawal have been studied at length. Patient characteristics associated with withdrawal are older age, female, white race, longer duration of dialysis, higher educational level, living alone, severe pain, and comorbidity (with chronic or progressive diseases). Ethnic differences have been observed, with African Americans and Hispanics being less likely to stop dialysis than European Americans. Reported prevalence levels of patient decision-making capacity at the time of withdrawal vary considerably with estimates ranging from 37% to 80%, suggesting cognitive failure drives many of these decisions. Nephrologists rate cognitive and physical functional status as the most important factors for their decision-making around stopping dialysis, and 93% of North American nephrologists report a willingness to honor a patient’s request to stop, even if they have a personal preference to continue. Internationally, practices vary tremendously, with much lower rates of dialysis cessation in Japan compared to North America, for instance.Responding to a request to stop dialysis For patients who are otherwise dying, counsel about terminal care issues surrounding dialysis withdrawal (seeFast Fact #208 ). For patients not otherwise close to death, explore reasons for withdrawal, especially for treatable factors that might contribute to the desire to withdraw dialysis. For patients whose desire to stop dialysis is being driven by factors that are potentially ameliorable, clinicians should make sure that the decision to stop dialysis is fully informed, including the possibility that some concerns could be addressed. These include:Inadequately treated depression, anxiety, pain, and other physical or psychological symptoms (including spiritual and existential suffering)Dissatisfaction or difficulties with dialysis itself (e.g., modality, time commitment, or setting of treatment)Inadequate social support, or concerns with being a burden to loved ones. Offer to evaluate and treat these concerns; consider a time-limited trial to see if a patient’s quality of life can be improved. However, once a clinician feels a patient or surrogate is making a fully informed choice that is consistent with a patient’s values and goals, that decision should be honored. Proactively address any concerns patients may voice about the ethics of withdrawal.Broaching dialysis withdrawal Clinicians who are concerned continuing dialysis is no longer benefitting a patient due the reasons described above should broach discontinuation with the patient and family. This discussion should occur as part of a larger goals-of-care conversation which addresses prognosis (seeFast Fact #191 ), patient/family assessment of quality of life, and establishes realistic care goals. Dialysis should be discussed as part of an overall medical plan and framed as how it can or cannot address the care goals. “Dialysis will likely make your mother live longer. However – given everything that has been happening – it is not going to improve her strength, memory, or ability to take care of herself. Based on what you’ve told me about your mother and what is important for her, I would recommend stopping the dialysis as it is only serving to maintain her in a state she would find unacceptable.”ReferencesGalla JH and the Renal Physicians Association/American Society of Nephrology Working Group. Clinical Practice Guideline on Shared Decision-Making in the Appropriate Initiation of and Withdrawal from Dialysis. J Am Soc Nephrol. 2000; 11:1340-1342.Murtagh F, Cohen LM, Germain MJ. Dialysis Discontinuation: Quo Vadis? Advances Chronic Kid Dis. 2007; 14(4):379-401.Holley JL, Davison SN, Moss AH. Nephrologists’ Changing Practices in Reported End-of-Life Decision-Making. Clin J Am Soc Nephrol. 2007; 2:107-111.White Y, Fitzpatrick G. Dialysis: prolonging life or prolonging dying? Ethical, legal and professional considerations for end of life decision making. EDTNA ERCA J. 2006; 32:99-103.Cohen LM, Germain MJ, Poppel DM. Practical considerations in dialysis withdrawal. “To have that option is a blessing.” JAMA. 2003; 289:2113-2119.Author Affiliations: The University of Alberta, Edmonton, Alberta (SND), and the Medical College of Wisconsin, Milwaukee, Wisconsin (DAR).ACGME Competencies: Interpersonal and Communications Skills, ProfessionalismKeywords: Communication
#208 Clinical Care Following Withdrawal of DialysisAuthor(s): Sara N Davison MD and Drew A Rosielle MDBackgroundFast Fact #207 discussed decision-making around dialysis discontinuation; this Fast Fact addresses care of the patient around the time of discontinuation.Communication and care-planning at the time of dialysis cessationCounsel about what to expect: mean survival following dialysis withdrawal is 8-10 days (although rarely can be many weeks). Address the likelihood of progressive encephalopathy.Counsel about symptoms (see below). Reassure patients/families that these can be adequately treated, although drugs with sedating side effects may be necessary to ensure comfort.Recommend continuing fluid restriction ( < 1L/day) to minimize edema if the patient is not thirsty. Discuss diet: a liberal, pleasure-based diet is appropriate for many patients although they should be cautioned it could worsen symptoms from edema.Address potential care sites for the final days of life.Review other medical treatments the patient is receiving and discontinue those that will not improve their quality of life while dying; clarify treatment limitations including resuscitation (code) status.Provide emotional/psychological, spiritual, social work, and bereavement support services.Symptom Management In one cohort of hospitalized patients who stopped dialysis confusion/agitation was reported to affect 70% of patients, followed by pain (55%), dyspnea (48%), nausea (36%), twitching/seizures (27%), anxiety/psychological distress (27%), pruritis (24%), and peripheral edema (21%). Because of a paucity of clinical research, the following recommendations are largely based on clinical experience and pharmacologic common sense. Many drugs which were previously cleared by dialysis may need to be dose-adjusted or discontinued. Treatment plans should be frequently re-evaluated, with particular attention to the use of scheduled medications.Pain management: Acetaminophen is the agent of choice for mild pain. Fast Fact #161 addresses opioid use in renal failure. Fentanyl and methadone are considered safest after dialysis discontinuation, although methadone should only be initiated by clinicians familiar with its use. Toxic hydromorphone metabolites, previously cleared by dialysis, can accumulate rapidly once dialysis is stopped and it should be used with caution and close monitoring of side effects. Gabapentin and pregabalin quickly accumulate once dialysis is stopped and should be discontinued or severely dose-reduced (seeFast Fact #49 ).Shortness of breath: Oxygen, positioning, and opioids are the mainstays of therapy (seeFast Fact #27 ). Ultrafiltration is not recommended as it can be distressing for patients/family to see the patient back on a therapy which appears similar to hemodialysis. For the occasional patient who has a residual urine output of >100 ml/day, high dose diuretics can be used.Anxiety/agitation/restlessness: Assure pain and psychosocial issues are addressed. Haloperidol or benzodiazepines are effective. Haloperidol may lower the seizure threshold and the metabolites are excreted in the urine and feces so it is recommended to dose at half the typical starting dose following dialysis withdrawal. While benzodiazepines do not accumulate in chronic kidney disease, clinical experience supports starting with very low doses in this population.Restless legs: Clonazepam is particularly useful for the restless legs associated with uremia (0.5 – 2.0 mg bid). Clonidine (0.1-0.2 mg bid) can also be used.Muscle cramps: Dialysis patients are often treated with quinine sulphate which accumulates rapidly once dialysis is stopped and should be discontinued. Clonazepam and other benzodiazepines are better in this setting.Nausea: Reduced doses of metoclopromide (starting at 5mg bid) are effective for gastroparesis. Uremia-induced nausea often responds well to dopamine antagonists such as haloperidol and prochloperazine which are often sedating in the context of uremia. Ondansetron has some advantages as it is less sedating and does not accumulate in kidney failure.Pruritus: Emollients such as hydrourea cream, ondansetron, and antihistamines may be beneficial. Gabapentin, while effective, is too toxic in this population to initiate its use. ReferencesGermain MJ, Cohen LM, Davison SN. Withholding and Withdrawing from Dialysis: What We Know About How Our Patients Die. Seminars in Dialysis. 2007; 20:200-204.Murtagh FEM, Addington-Hall JM, Donohoe P, Higginson IJ. Symptom Management in Patients With Established Renal Failure Managed Without Dialysis. EDTNA ERCA J. 2006; 32:93-98.Chambers EJ, Germain M, Brown E (Eds.). Supportive Care for the Renal Patient (1st Edition). New York, NY: Oxford University Press; 2004.Cohen LM, Germain MJ, Poppel DM. Practical considerations in dialysis withdrawal. “To have that option is a blessing.” JAMA. 2003; 289:2113-2119.Murtagh FE, Chai MO, Donohoe P, Edmonds PM, Higginson IJ. The use of opioid analgesia in end-stage renal disease patients managed without dialysis: recommendations for practice. J Pain Palliat Care Pharmacother. 2007; 21:5-16.Lugon JR. Uremic pruritus: a review. Hemodialysis Intl. 2005; 9:180-88.Author Affiliations: University of Alberta, Edmonton, Alberta (SND), and the Medical College of Wisconsin, Milwaukee, Wisconsin (DAR).ACGME Competencies: Patient Care, Interpersonal and Communications SkillsKeywords: Communication, Pain – Evaluation, Pain – Opioids
#209 Malignant Pericardial EffusionsAuthor(s): Vincent Thai MDIntroduction Malignant pericardial effusions (MPEs) are a rare complication of advanced cancer, but are associated with high morbidity and mortality. This Fast Fact discusses the diagnosis and management of MPEs.Epidemiology and Prognosis Approximately 10% of patients with cancer develop cardiac metastases, with ~75% of these affecting the epicardium (1, 2). Only a third of these, however, will develop clinically significant MPEs (1). Lung and breast cancers are the most common causes. MPEs are associated with a poor prognosis. Studies suggest a median survival of 2-3 months after a MPE is diagnosed, with a mean survival of 5 months for solid tumors and 20 months for hematologic malignancies (3, 4).Physiology and Symptoms The pericardial space is normally filled with <50 ml of serous fluid. As this volume increases due to epicardial or pericardial metastases or lymphatic obstruction, both right and left ventricular failure can occur due to inadequate filling. Signs and symptoms include peripheral and pulmonary edema, chest discomfort, cough, shortness of breath, and orthopnea. Severity of symptoms depends on the volume of the MPE as well as the rapidity of its accumulation; severe cases can present with cardiac tamponade and shock. An echocardiogram is indicated whenever a MPE is suspected. Not only does it confirm the presence of an effusion, but its findings can dictate whether or not urgent treatment is indicated (e.g. if signs of tamponade are evident). A diagnostic pericardiocentesis or pericardial biopsy is sometimes needed to confirm the cause of the effusion.Treatment OptionsSystemic chemotherapy or radiotherapy are effective for chemo- or radio-sensitive tumors such as previously untreated breast cancer and many lymphomas. Reaccumulation rates for both modalities are about 1/3 overall, depending on the patient’s overall course and response to therapy (5).Pericardiocentesis results in immediate symptom relief in most patients, however the effusion may rapidly re-accumulate in many patients, requiring repeat pericardiocentesis (within 1-2 weeks in some series) (6).Pericardial sclerosis involves instilling a sclerosing agent with the intention of scarring the pericardium to the epicardium, preventing reaccumulation of the MPE (similar to pleural effusions –seeFast Fac t #157 ). Multiple agents have been studied including doxyclycline, minocycline, and bleomycin. Success rates (no reaccumulation at 30 days) are about 70-90% (7, 8). Longer term success rates have not been defined due to the poor survival of study patients. The major side effect is chest pain (50-70%), cardiac arrhythmias, and fever (8, 9, 10). In head to head comparisons with doxycycline, bleomycin has been shown to have fewer side effects and to lead to shorter hospitalizations (10, 11, 12).Surgical decompression therapies range from less invasive (balloon pericardiotomy, subxiphoid or thorascopic pericardiostomy) to more extensive (open thoracotomy with pericardial stripping). A pericardial ‘window’ (which allows ongoing drainage of fluid externally or internally such as into the pleural cavity) is often created. Case series have suggested reaccumulation rates with surgical therapies are low (less than 15% up to 10 months out) (13, 14, 15).Decision-Making The treatment of MPEs depends on how urgently treatment is needed, the likelihood of the tumor responding to anti-neoplastic treatments, and the anticipated survival of the patient. A multidisciplinary approach to decision-making, involving input from medical and radiation oncology, cardiology, and thoracic surgery is recommended. Simple pericardiocentesis may be appropriate for patients with short prognoses ( <1 month), particularly if their MPE is not expected to re-accumulate in their remaining life-span. A symptomatic patient with no signs of tamponade and a chemotherapy-sensitive tumor such as untreated breast cancer may receive a durable response from a pericardiocentesis for symptom relief, followed by chemotherapy. Patients with longer prognoses (>1 month) who are expected to re-accumulate their MPEs will likely benefit most from sclerosis or surgical decompression; there is no clear evidence currently suggesting one strategy is superior to the other. Symptom directed care without specific intervention for the MPE is an appropriate option for patients with very short prognoses and for those who decline more invasive treatments.ReferencesKlatt EC, Heitz DR. Cardiac metastases. Cancer. 1990; 65(6):1456-59.Abraham KP, Reddy V, Gattuso P. Neoplasms metastatic to the heart: review of 3314 consecutive autopsies. Am.J.Cardiovasc.Pathol. 1990; 3:195-198.Moores, D.W, Allen K.B, Faber L.P, Dziuban S.W, Gillman D.J, Warren W.H., Ilves R, Lininger L, Subxiphoid pericardial drainage for pericardial tamponade, J Thoracic Cardiovascular Surg. 1995; 109:546-552.Dosios T, Theaskos,N, Angouras D, et al. Risk factors affecting the survival of patients with pericardial effusion submitted to subxiphoid pericardiostomy. Chest. 2003; 124:242Lamont E, Hoffman PC. Oncologic emergencies. In: Hall JB, et al, eds. Principles of Critical Care. 3rd Edition. New York, NY: McGraw Hill; 2005.Laham RJ, Cohen DJ, Kuntz RE et al. Pericardial effusion in patients with cancer: outcome with contemporary management strategies. HEART. 1996; 75(1):67-71.Lashevsky I, Ben Yosef R, Rinkevich D, Reisner S, Markiewicz W. Intrapericardial minocycline sclerosis for malignant pericardial effusion. Chest. 1996; 109(6):1452-54.Maher EA, Shepherd FA, Todd TJR. Pericardial sclerosis as the primary management of malignant pericardial effusion and cardiac tamponade. J Thoracic Cardiovascular Surg. 1996; 112(3):637-643.Ben Yosef,R, Phefer,R, Ge,A, Catane,R. Management of malignant pericardial effusion Harefuah, 1988; 115:138-141.Liu G, Crump M, Goss PE, Dancey J, Shepherd FA. Prospective comparison of the sclerosing agents doxycycline and bleomycin for the primary management of malignant pericardial effusion and cardiac tamponade. J Clin.Oncol. 1996; 14(12):3141-47.Yano T, Yokoyama H, Inoue T, et al. A simple technique to manage malignant pericardial effusion with a local instillation of bleomycin in non-small cell carcinoma of the lung. Oncology. 1994; 51:507-509.van Belle SJ, Volckaert A, Taeymans Y, Spapen H, Block P. Treatment of malignant pericardial tamponade with sclerosis induced by instillation of bleomycin. Int.J.Cardiol. 1987; 16(2):155-160.Galli M, Politi A, Pedretti F, Castiglioni B, Zerboni S. Percutaneous balloon pericardiotomy for malignant pericardial tamponade. Chest. 1995; 108(6):1499-1501.Palacios IF, Tuzcu EM, Ziskind AA, Younger J, Block PC. Percutaneous balloon pericardial window for patients with malignant pericardial effusion and tamponade. Cathet.Cardiovasc.Diagn. 1999; 22(4):244-49.Ziskind AA, Pearce AC, Lemmon CC, et al. Percutaneous balloon pericardiotomy for the treatment of cardiac tamponade and large pericardial effusions: description of technique and report of the first 50 cases. J.Am.Coll.Cardiol. 1993; 21(1):1-5.Author Affiliation: University of Alberta, Edmonton, Alberta.ACGME Competencies: Medical Knowledge, Patient CareKeywords: Non-Pain Symptoms and Syndromes
#210 Suicidal Attempts in the Terminally IllAuthor(s): Sean Marks MD and Drew Rosielle MDBackground Chronic or advanced medical illness is a significant risk factor for suicidality (1). This Fast Fact discusses evaluating and responding to suicidality in patients with life-limiting diseases. Note: this Fast Fact does not address cases of ‘physician assisted suicide’ which have occurred after a deliberative process including psychiatric screening such as in Oregon in the US (2).EthicsCore Principles: It is a core obligation of physicians to prevent a patient from initiating suicide and to intervene medically to prevent a patient from dying after a suicide attempt (3). This obligation can include detaining and restraining patients against their will and the use of invasive medical interventions such as mechanical ventilation if needed, although such restrictions to a patient’s liberty should be kept to the minimum necessary. Most suicidal patients are considered impaired by depression or other mental illnesses and their actions are not considered autonomous, thus justifying detaining patients and providing medical interventions against their will (4). Such interventions can create further opportunities to treat the patient’s psychiatric condition, and only 20% of people who are prevented from committing suicide subsequently complete another attempt.Exceptions at life’s end: The above logic is less compelling in terminally ill patients who have attempted suicide, particularly with short prognoses (e.g. <1 month). In these patients most medical interventions are unlikely to restore health or significantly alter the dying process in a way that would materially benefit the patient. Clinicians may opt to forgo certain interventions (e.g. mechanical ventilation), particularly if family/proxy decision makers consider such interventions inappropriate in their dying loved ones. In these situations clinicians are advised to 1) verify the certainty of the very short prognosis, utilizing consultants liberally, 2) discuss with proxy decision makers all possible treatment plans including, when feasible, less-invasive supportive care options with treatment limitations (e.g. ICU monitoring, gastric lavage and charcoal administration for an overdose, but establishing a do-not-resuscitate/do-not-intubate order even if the patient deteriorates), and 3) seek ethics consultation.Advance Directives: Advance directives such as living wills stating a patient’s wish to not be mechanically ventilated are not binding in the setting of a suicide attempt. However, they should be honored in patients with short prognoses per the discussion above. Advanced directives specifying treatment limitations should be re-evaluated if it is suspected those statements were made during a period of undetected depression (5,6).Epidemiology and Risk Factors The actual rate of suicide attempts in terminally ill patients is unknown, and there has been limited research into specifically ‘terminally ill’ populations. What is clear is that advancing age and psychiatric comorbidity are risk factors for suicide (along with male sex, AIDS diagnosis, a family history of suicide, and uncontrolled pain) (7,8). Cancer patients have nearly twice the incidence of suicide than the general population (rate of 31.4/100,000 vs. 16.7/100,000 patient-years) (6). Lung, stomach, and head and neck cancers have the highest suicide rates among all cancer types (9). Up to 8.5% of terminally ill cancer patients express a sustained and pervasive wish for an early death, and in one survey of terminally ill patients, 10% of patients reported “seriously pursuing” physician assisted suicide (10,11). Rates of actual suicide attempts are presumably lower.Assessment All patients with life-limiting illnesses should be routinely assessed for depression and mood disorders (seeFast Facts #7 ,43 ); depressed patients should be screened for suicidal thoughts. Patients who admit to suicidal thoughts or a desire for hastened death should be asked about specific plans for self-harm, past history of suicide attempts, access to firearms or other lethal means to carry out a suicidal act, and level of support/supervision available in the home (e.g. family caregivers). Although some clinicians may be concerned that exploring suicidal thoughts may make suicide more likely, there is no evidence that this occurs. Many ill patients who express a desire for death are simply communicating unresolved emotional and existential concerns about dying:seeFast Facts #156 &159 .Responding to Suicidal Intent All patients who are seriously threatening self-harm, or who have pervasive thoughts of ending their life, should be evaluated urgently by a psychiatrist (12). Immediate resources depend on local availability and can include prompt evaluation by an established psychiatrist, medical or psychiatric urgent care clinics or emergency departments, or even voluntary hospital admission. Options include voluntary psychiatric treatment, arranging 24 hour safety monitoring from the patient’s family and friends, introducing home hospice or home nursing support, removing means to carry out a suicidal act, and imposing emergency detention. For disabled patients close to death, removing the means of self-harm (e.g. limit access to pain medications as long as a reliable family member can administer them) and providing close supervision through, for instance, hospice services are often sufficient and minimally restrictive.ReferencesHendin H. Suicide, assisted suicide and medical illness. J of Clin Psychiatry. 1999; 60 Suppl 2:46-50.Death With Dignity Act Report 2007. State of Oregon Department of Human Services. Available at: http://www.oregon.gov/DHS/ph/pas/index.shtml. Accessed November 10, 2008.Lo B. Resolving ethical dilemmas: a guide for clinicians – 3rd Edition. Lippincott Williams & Wilkins, 2005: 256-9.Miller RD. Need-for-treatment criteria for involuntary civil commitment: impact in practice. Am J Psychiatry. 1992; 149:1380-4.Ganzini L, Lee MA, Heinz RT, et al. The effect of depression treatment on elderly patients’ preferences for life sustaining medical therapy. Am J of Psychiatry. 1994; 151:1631-6.Sontheimer D. Suicide by advance directive. J Med Ethics. 2008; 34:e4; doi:10.1136/jme.2008.025619.Farberow NL, Banzler S, Cutter F, Reynolds D. An eight-year survey of hospital suicides. Suicide and Life-Threatening Behavior. 1971; 1:184-201.Rabins PV. Prevention of mental disorder in the elderly: current perspectives and future prospects. J Am Geriatric Soc. 1992; 40:727-33.Misono S, Weiss NS, Fann JR, Redman M, Yueh B. Incidence of suicide in persons with cancer. J Clin Oncol. 2008; 26:4731-4738.Chochinov HM, Wilson KG, Enns M, Mowchun N, Lander S, Levitt M, et al. Desire for death in the terminally ill. Am J Psychiatry. 1995; 152:1185-91.Emanuel EJ, Fairclough DL, Emanuel LL. Attitudes and desires related to euthanasia and physician-assisted suicide among terminally ill patients and their caregivers. JAMA. 2000; 284:2460-2468.Block SD. Chapter 6: Assessing and managing depression in the terminally ill patient. Physician’s Guide to End of Life Care. Snyder, Lois ACP Press; 2001.Author Affiliations: Medical College of Wisconsin, Milwaukee, Wisconsin.ACGME Competencies: Professionalism; Systems Based PracticeKeywords: Ethics, Law, Policy Health Systems
#211 Guided Imagery for AnxietyAuthor(s): Karen Cooper LCSW, OSW-C and Susan Stollings PhDBackground Anxiety occurs in hospitalized patients for many reasons including fear of specific procedures, worry about the future, and lack of control. Guided imagery is an intervention that can be delivered at the bedside in 10-15 minutes by a wide range of trained health care providers at a low cost (1). This Fast Fact will discuss guided imagery as an anxiety reduction technique.The Technique Guided imagery is a mind-body exercise based on prompting patients to formulate meaningful mental pictures to achieve relaxation and reduce anxiety. Many guided imagery scripts include common elements such as asking the patient to sit or lie in a comfortable position, quieting the mind, removing negative thoughts and images, and calling to mind a vivid image or scenario that is calming and relaxing (a ‘safe place’). The content of a guided imagery script can include quiet and peaceful music with focus on a “safe place” where one feels secure and relaxed or it may involve more active, physical sensations such as playing and winning a tennis match. It can be performed by trained professionals or with the use of audio recordings, and can be performed daily or as needed by the patient. An example of language used in a guided imagery exercise is:“Position yourself as comfortably as you can, shifting your weight so that you’re allowing your body to be fully supported by your chair or couch…. Take a deep, full, cleansing breath…inhaling as fully as you can…breathing deep into the belly if you can…and breathing all the way out…. Imagine a place where you feel safe and peaceful and easy…a place either make-believe or real….” See reference (2) for an example of a full script. Information about further training in the use of guided imagery can be found athttp://academyforguidedimagery.com.Research Outcomes Guided imagery has been shown to reduce anxiety and use of anxiolytics, and to improve patient satisfaction in a variety of medical settings (1, 3, 7). In separate studies it was shown to significantly reduce anxiety and worry among patients facing abdominal surgery or cardiac catheterization compared to usual care (3, 4). In a group of patients who had been hospitalized for more than two days, use of anxiolytic medication and heart rate were lower in the guided imagery group than in a control group (5). A combination of diaphragmatic breathing and guided imagery was used with a group of breast and gynecological cancer brachytherapy patients using 10 minutes of face to face training and a follow-up taped script via audiocassette. Patients in the intervention group had significantly less anxiety at follow-up several weeks later than those in the control group (6). Clinical experience and expert opinion support its helpfulness for advanced cancer patients, although there is little research yet in this population (8).Limits and Cautions While a safe technique, guided imagery can rarely elicit negative emotional reactions, as well as create situations of patient vulnerability and susceptibility. Due to this, guided imagery should be initiated in health care settings by a clinician who is trained in its proper use, who is comfortable with professional therapeutic boundaries, and who can respond appropriately to negative emotional reactions. In particular, guided imagery may trigger flashbacks in patients with post-traumatic stress disorder, and it is relatively contraindicated in these patients. It is also contraindicated in patients who have hallucinations or delusions, delirium, or severe obsessive compulsive disorder. As with any intervention, there are some patients who do not benefit from this technique or who are unable to call to mind a relaxing image.ReferencesMiller R. Nurses at community hospital welcome guided imagery tool. Dimensions Crit Care Nursing. 2003; 22(5):225-226.Naparstek B. Staying Well with Guided Imagery. New York, NY: Warner Books; 1994: pp.76-79.Tusek D, Church JM, Fazio V W. Guided imagery as a coping strategy for perioperative patients. AORN Journal. 1997; 66(4):644-649.McCaffrey R, Taylor N. Effective anxiety treatment prior to diagnostic cardiac catheterization. Holistic Nursing Practice. 2005; 19(2):70-73.Toth M, Wolsko PM, Foreman J, Davis RB, Delbanco T, Phillips RS. A pilot study for a randomized, controlled trial on the effects of guided imagery in hospitalized medical patients. J Alternative Complementary Med. 2007; 13(2):194-197.Leon-Pizarro C, Gich I, Barthe E, et al. A randomized trial of the effect of training in relaxation and guided imagery techniques in improving psychological and quality of life indices for gynecologic and breast brachytherapy patients. Psycho-Oncology. 2007; 16:971-979.Halpin LS, Speir AM, CapoBianco P, Barnett SD. Guided imagery in cardiac surgery. Outcomes Management. 2002; 6(3):132-137.Foley KM, Back A, Bruera E, et al, eds. When the Focus is on Care: Palliative Care and Cancer. Atlanta, GA: American Cancer Society; 2005: p.176.Author Affiliations: University of Pittsburgh Medical Center, Pittsburgh, PA.ACGME Competencies: Medical KnowledgeKeywords: Non-Pain Symptoms and Syndromes
#212 Phantom Limb PainAuthor(s): Kavitha Ramchandran MD and Joshua Hauser MDBackground Phantom limb pain (PLP) can be a painful and debilitating consequence of limb amputation from any cause including trauma, cancer, and vascular diseases. This Fast Fact will review the evaluation and management of PLP.Definition and Characteristics PLP describes pain which patients perceive as coming from an amputated limb as if it were still contiguous with the body. It is distinct from pain at the actual site of the amputation (‘stump pain’). Patients usually experience PLP as occurring in the distal part of the phantom limb and can describe it as feeling ‘burning,’ ‘tingling,’ ‘sharp,’ and ‘cramping.’ Uncomfortable perceptions of limb distortion (such as retraction into the stump) are also reported. PLP is most commonly seen after limb amputation, but similar syndromes can occur with the removal of other body parts including breasts, testicles, eyes, and tongue.Epidemiology PLP occurs in 50-80% of patients after amputation, but is severe in 5-10% of cases. Risk factors for developing PLP include: tumor-related amputations, chronic limb pain prior to amputation, and significant pain the day of amputation. Despite this, meticulous peri-operative analgesia with epidural anesthesia has not been clearly shown to prevent PLP.Pathophysiology Both central and peripheral mechanisms are believed to mediate PLP and are incompletely understood. Amputation can lead to reorganization of the somatosensory cortex with ‘remapping’ of the location of amputated limb into the mouth and chin areas. For these patients stimulation of the mouth or ipsilateral face can cause sensations, including pain, that seem be originating from the phantom limb. Central sensitization from preexisting chronic limb pain as well as ectopic discharges from the stump neuroma are also implicated.Therapy While both drug and non-drug therapies have been investigated, treatment of phantom limb pain remains poorly studied and is largely empiric. Due to the complex nature of PLP and its therapies, a multi-disciplinary approach to treatment is mandatory including pain specialists, physiatrists, physical and occupational therapists, and psychologists.Drug treatment: Most clinicians approach PLP as a neuropathic pain syndrome. A few small controlled trials have shown positive results with gabapentin, ketamine, and opioids, but not with tricyclic antidepressants. Despite this, there is insufficient evidence to judge the superiority or inferiority of any drug therapy for PLP, and most clinicians empirically use the full range of adjuvant analgesics along with opioid therapy if needed in its management.Non-drug treatments: Non-pharmacologic therapies have also been investigated. These include myoelectrical prostheses, transelectrical nerve stimulation, and mirror therapy. In small studies, the regular use of a myoelectric prosthesis (a prosthesis with electrodes embedded in the socket which stimulate nerves in the stump), has been demonstrated to alter cortical re-organization and reduce pain. For those patients for whom a myoelectric prosthesis is not possible, transelectrical nerve stimulation (a TENS unit) to the stump can have a similar affect. A newly investigated approach is mirror therapy. Mirror therapy involves the placement of mirrors to create the illusion of an intact limb (patients visually perceive that they have an intact limb where their stump is). Patients are taught to move both the real and the illusory limb with the hypothesis that this increases control of the brain over the phantom limb and leads to a decrease in PLP. In one small controlled study 100% of patients who underwent mirror therapy had a decrease in pain.ReferencesDevor M, Seltzer Z. Pathophysiology of damaged nerves in relation to chronic pain. In: Wall PD, Melzack RA, eds. Textbook of Pain. 4th Ed. New York , NY: Churchill-Livingstone; 1999.Bone M, Critchley P, Buggy D. Gabapentin in postamputation phantom limb pain: A randomized, double-blind, placebo-controlled, cross-over study. Reg Anesth Pain Med. 2002; 27:481-486.Robinson LR, Czerniecki JM, Ehde DM, et al. Trial of amitriptyline for relief of pain in amputees: results of a randomized controlled study. Arch Phys Med Rehabil. 2004; 85:1-6.Flor H. Phantom limb pain: characteristics, causes, treatment. Lancet Neurol. 2002; 1:182-189.Dworkin RH et al. Pharmacologic management of neuropathic pain: evidenced-based recommendations. Pain. 2007. 132:237-251.Chan BL, Witt R. Mirror therapy for phantom limb pain. N Engl J Med. 2007; 357:2206-7.Author Affiliations Northwestern University Feinberg School of Medicine Palliative Care and Home Hospice Program.ACGME Competencies: Medical KnowledgeKeywords: Pain – Evaluation
#213 Prognosis in HIV and AIDSAuthor(s): Steven Oppenheim MDIntroduction The prognosis of patients with HIV/AIDS (Human Immunodeficiency Virus infection/Acquired Immune Deficiency Syndrome) has improved dramatically since 1996 for those who have access to appropriate treatment. Due to the success of combination antiretroviral therapy (cART) since 1996 as well as improvements in the prevention and treatment HIV complications, over 80% of patients are now alive 10 years after sero-conversion. Deaths from opportunistic infections (OI) have declined while mortality from other co-morbidities has become more common (e.g. hepatitis B and C infection, renal failure, non-HIV-related cancers, cardiovascular disease, suicide, and complications of substance abuse). In fact, patients with CD4 counts >200 cells/mm3 are more likely to die from non-HIV-related illnesses than they are from complications of AIDS, at least over a time-frame of one decade. This Fast Fact discusses prognostication in patients who are suffering life-threatening complications related to HIV infection using data where cART was available.Fast Fact #214 will discuss prognosis specifically for malignancies arising in the setting of HIV infection.Prognostic PrinciplesNumerous factors affect prognosis such as age, remaining antiviral treatment options, opportunistic infections’ response to therapy, the development of untreatable complications, functional status, nutritional status, CD4 cell count, and HIV viral load.In the pre-cART era median survival for people with a CD4 count < 50 cells/mm3 ranged between 12-27 months, and patients with CD4 counts <20 cells/mm3 had a median survival of 11 months. These ranges are grossly applicable to contemporary patients off cART due to lack of access, side effects, compliance problems, or multidrug resistance. Although individuals can have a dramatic clinical improvement and more favorable prognosis if they resume cART or new and effective drugs become available.Due to the rapidly changing field of HIV medicine, close collaboration with the patient’s HIV provider is mandatory. While the following data are the best available they remain incomplete, may become outdated as therapies evolve, and should be applied to individual patients cautiously.Survival for all the HIV associated complications discussed in this Fast Fact has improved due to the use of cART.Common causes of death in patients with HIV/AIDS with available survival dataDisseminated mycobacterium avium complex infection: median survival is ~10 months with optimal therapy.Pneumocystis pneumonia: survival for all patients presenting is 80-90%. Short-term ICU survival is 75% in patients on cART and 37% not on cART.Disseminated cytomegalovirus infection (including retinitis): the largest prospective cohort study demonstrated a median survival of 35 months for all patients on cART compared with 8 months for those not using cART. Six month survival is 61-73% for patients not taking or not responding to cART, but 98% for patients with low CD4 counts who initiate and respond well to cART (CD4 count increases to over 50 cells/mm3), following their diagnosis of cytomegalovirus end organ disease.Toxoplasma encephalitis: 77-90% of patients are alive after 12 months if on cART, and most who die do so within 6 months of diagnosis. Persistence of altered mental status after initiation of anti-Toxoplasma therapy is a strong predictor of early death.Progressive multifocal leukoencephalopathy: median survival is ~11 months on cART, 4 months without cART. If cART is started after PML is diagnosed, 1 year survival is 58% vs. 24% for those who develop PML already on cART.AIDS Dementia complex: is caused by HIV and results in progressive cognitive, motor, and behavioral decline. The median survival is 40-81 months from the time of diagnosis; shorter if the CD4 cell count remains <200 cells/mm3 with HIV-Viral load >5,000 copies/ml.AIDS wasting syndrome: is defined by the involuntary loss of >10% body weight along with fever not associated with an OI or neoplasm, and either chronic diarrhea or weakness. Patients with very low lean body mass index (mass in kilograms/height in meters squared) – less than 14.5kg/m2 – have a median survival of ~16 months. These data are from the mid-1990s and it is unclear if the prognosis has changed in the last decade. With unintentional weight loss which does not meet the syndrome definition (loss of 5-10% body weight) there is still a four-fold increased risk of death over 6 months.ReferencesAntinori A, Cingolani A, Lorenzini P, et al. Clinical epidemiology and survival of progressive multifocal leukoencephalopathy in the era of highly active antiretroviral therapy: Data from the Italian Registry Investigative Neuro AIDS (IRINA). J Neurovirol. 2003; 9(Suppl 1):47-53.Antinori A, Larussa D, Cingolani A et al. Prevalence, associated factors and prognostic determinants of AIDS-related Toxoplasmic encephalitis in the era of advanced highly active antiretroviral therapy. Clin Infect Dis. 2004; 39:1681-1691.Bhaskaran K, Hamouda O, Sannes M, et al. Changes in the Risk of Death After HIV Seroconversion Compared With Mortality in the General Population. JAMA. 2008; 300(1):51-59.Clifford DB, Yiannoutsos C, Glicksman M, et al. HAART improves prognosis in HIV-associated progressive multifocal leykoencephalopathy. Neurology. 1999; 52:623-625.Coakley E, Samore M, Gillis J, et. Al. The values of quantitative serum HIV-1 RNA levels and CD4 cell counts of <50 x 10 6 cells/L. AIDS. 2000; 14:1147-1153.D’Avignon LC, Schofield CM, Hospenthal DR. Pneumocystis Pneumonia. Semin Respir Crit Care Med. 2008; 29(2):132-40.Dore GJ, MvDonald A, Yueming L, et al. Marked improvement in survival following AIDS dementia complex in the era of highly active antiretroviral therapy. AIDS. 2003; 17:1539-1545.Dworkin MS, Wan PC, Hanson DL, Jones JL. Progressive Multifocal leukoencephalopathy: Improved survival of human immunodeficiency virus-infected patients in the protease-inhibitor era. J Infect Dis. 1999; 180:621-625.Gasnault J, Taoufik Y, Goujard C et al. Prolonged survival without neurological improvement in patients with AIDS-related progressive multifocal leukoencephalopathy on potent combined antiretroviral therapy. J Neurovirol. 1999; 13:1426-1428.Hoffmann C, Ernst M, Wolf E, et al. Evolving characteristics of toxoplasmosis in patients infected with human immunodeficiency virus-1: clinical course and Toxoplasma gondii-specific immune responses. Clin Microbiol Infect. 2007; 13:510-515.Karakousis PC, Moore RD, Chaisson RE. Mycobacterium avium complex in patients with HIV infection in the era of highly active antiretroviral therapy. Lancet Infectious Diseases. 2004; 4:557-565.Kempen JH, Jabs DA, Wilson LA, et al. Mortality risk for patients with cytomegalovirus retinitis and acquired immune deficiency syndrome. Clin Infect Dis. 2003; 37:1365-1373.Krentz HB, Kliewer G and Gill MJ. Changing mortality rates and causes of death for HIV-infected individuals living in Southern Alberta, Canada from 1998 to 2003. HIV Medicine. 2005; 6:99-106.MacArthur RD, et.al. Comparison of prognostic significance of latest CD4 cell count and HIV RNA levels in patients with advanced HIV infection on highly active antiretroviral therapy. HIV Clin Trials. 2005; 6:127-135.Melchior JC, Niyongabo T, Henzel D, Durack-Bown J, Boulier A. Malnutrition and wasting, immunodepression, and chronic inflammation as independent predictors of survival in HIV-infected patients. Nutrition. 1999; 15:865-869.Mikaelsson L, Jacobson G, Andersson R. Pneumocystis pneumonia: a retrospective study 1991-2001 in Gothenburg, Sweden. J Infect. 2006; 53:260-265.Moore RD, Chaisson RE. Natural history of opportunistic disease in an HIV infected urban clinical cohort. Ann Intern Med. 1996; 124:633-642.Morris A, Wachter RM, Luce J, Turner J, Huang L. Improved survival with highly active antiretroviral therapy in HIV-infected patients with severe Pneumocystis carinii pneumonia. AIDS. 2003; 17:73-80.Selwyn PA, Forstein M. Overcoming the false dichotomy of curative vs palliative for late-stage HIV/AIDS. “Let me live the way I want to live, until I can’t”: JAMA. 2003; 290:806-814.Shen JM, Blank A, Selwyn PA. Predictors of Mortality for Patients with Advanced Disease in an HIV Palliative Care Program: J AIDS. 2005; 40:445-447.Shetty SM, Vanston VJ, Alexander C. The Hospice and Palliative Medicine Approach to Caring for Patients with HIV/AIDS. UNIPAC-7. 3rd Ed. Glenview, IL: American Academy of Hospice and Palliative Medicine; 2008.Tang AM, Forrester J, Spieglman D, et al. Weight loss and survival in HIV-positive patients in the era of highly active antiretroviral therapy. JAIDS. 2002; 31:230-236.Tozzi V, Balestra P, Serraino D, et al. Neurocognitive impairment and survival in a cohort of HIV-infected patients treated with HAART. AIDS Res Human Retrov. 2005; 21:706-713.The Antiretroviral Therapy (ART) Cohort Collaboration. Prognosis of HIV-1-infected patients up to 5 years after initiation of HAART: collaborative analysis of prospective studies. AIDS. 2007; 21:1185-1197.The CASCADE Collaboration. Effective Therapy has altered the spectrum of cause-specific mortality following HIV-seroconversion. AIDS. 2006; 20: 741-749.Welch K, Morse A, et al. The clinical profile of end-stage AIDS in the era of highly active antiretroviral therapy. AIDS Pt Care and STDs. 2002; 16:75-81.Author Affiliation: San Diego Hospice at the Institute for Palliative Care, San Diego, California.ACGME Competencies: Medical KnowledgeKeywords: Prognosis
#214 Prognosis in HIV Associated MalignanciesAuthor(s): Steven Oppenheim MDBackgroundFast Fact #213 introduced prognostic principles in HIV/AIDS, as well as gave survival data for many life-threatening complications of HIV infection. This Fast Fact presents survival data for malignancies commonly arising in the setting of HIV/AIDS. Before applying these data to individual patients, consideration should be given to the prognostic principles in HIV/AIDS discussed inFast Fact #213.Prognostic DataAIDS related Kaposi’s sarcoma (KS) , has become less common since the use of combination antiretroviral therapy (cART). It is a grossly violaeous spindle cell tumor, more common amongst men who have sex with men, and is associated with co-infection with human herpes virus-8. KS can involve the skin, mucous membranes, and viscera. Some patients with mild to moderate KS may have complete resolution of their disease with cART and/or chemotherapy. More extensive disease of the skin or viscera portends a poorer prognosis with a 2 year survival of 58%. A prognostic index has been developed for patients with KS on cART. In this index age > 50 years, developing KS as a later-stage complication of HIV infection (as opposed to KS being a patient’s first AIDS-defining illness), CD4 cell count <100 cells/mm3, and having other concurrent HIV-related complications all were poor prognostic markers (see reference 13). Patients with all 4 poor markers had a 1 year survival of ~40%.Primary CNS lymphoma is strongly associated with Epstein Barr virus infection. Treatments include cART, whole brain radiation and chemotherapy. Median survival was 3 months before the use of cART, but has improved to 16 months for those responding to cART (with ≥ 50 CD4 cell count increase over their baseline count or ≥ 0.5log10* HIV viral load decrease after lymphoma diagnosis).Systemic non-Hodgkin’s Lymphoma (Diffuse Large Cell Lymphoma - DLCL) is the most common lymphoma associated with HIV infection. A decreased incidence has not been observed with cART, although survival in HIV patients is now approaching that of DLCL patients without HIV. 5 year survival with current chemotherapy regimens is approximately 50%. A well-validated tool for stratifying DLCL survival is the International Prognostic Index (IPI) which includes age, tumor stage, serum LDH, performance status, and the number of extranodal disease sites. Patients with intermediate-risk IPI scores have a 50-64% 3 year survival. However patients with high-risk IPI scores have only a 13% 3 year survival, even in the cART era (see references 3, 9).Squamous cell carcinoma (SCC) of the cervix is seen frequently in patients with HIV and is caused by the human papilloma virus. Survival data are limited for HIV infected patients, but it appears to be similar to patients without HIV infection and is unaffected by the use of or response to cART. Five year survival of SCC of the cervix is 86% for locally invasive disease, 43% with regional disease, and 11% with metastatic disease.Squamous cell carcinoma (SCC) of the anus, while not officially an AIDS-defining malignancy, is 120 times more common in HIV infected than non-infected patients and is also associated with human papilloma virus infection. Survival does not seem to be affected by HIV status, with overall 2 year survival in the ~75% range. * 0.5 log10 decrease equals, for instance, a decrease of 4.0 to 3.5 log10, or 10,000 to 3,160 copies HIV-RNA/ml.ReferencesBernstein WB, Little RF, Wilson WH, Yarchoan R. Acquired Immunodeficiency Syndrome-related malignancies in the era of highly active antiretroviral therapy. Int. J Hematology. 2006; 84:3-11.Biggar RJ, Engles EA, Ly S, et al. Survival after cancer diagnosis in persons with AIDS. JAIDS. 2005; 39:293-299.Bower M, Gazzard B, Mandalia S, et al. A prognostic index for systemic AIDS-related non-Hodgkin lymphoma treated in the era of highly active antiretroviral therapy. Ann Intern Med. 2005; 143:265-273.Cheung MC, Pantanowitz L, Dezube BJ. AIDS Related Malignancies: Emerging challenges in the era of highly active antiretroviral therapy. The Oncologist. 2005; 10:412-426.Chiao EY, Giordano TP, Richardson P, El-Serag HB. Human Immunodeficiency Virus-associated squamous cell cancer of the anus: Epidemiology and outcomes in the highly active antiretroviral therpy era. J Clin Onc. 2008; 26:474-479.Hentrich M, Maretta L, Chow KU, et al. Highly active antiretroviral therapy (HAART) improves survival in HIV-associated Hodgkin’s disease: results of a multicenter study. Ann Oncology. 2006; 17:914-919.Hoffmann C, Tabrizian S, Wolf E. Survival of AIDS patients with primary central nervous system lymphoma is dramatically improved by HAART-induced immune recovery. AIDS. 2001; 15:2119-2127.Goldie SJ, Weinstein MC, Kuntz KM, Freedberg KA. The costs, clinical benefits and cost-effectiveness of screening for cervical cancer in HIV-infected women. Ann Intern Med. 1999; 130:97-107.Lim ST, Karim R, Tulpule A, Nathwani BN, Levine AM. Prognostic factors in HIV-related diffuse large-cell lymphoma: before versus after highly active antiretroviral therapy. J Clin Oncol. 2005; 23:8477-8482.Mounier N, Spina M, Gisselbreght C. Modern management of non-Hodgkin lymphoma in HIV-infected patients. Br J Haem. 2007; 136:685-698.Oehler-Janne C, Huguet F, Provencher S, et al. HIV specific differences in outcome of squamous cell carcinoma of the anal canal: a multicentric cohort study of HIV-positive patients receiving highly active antiretroviral therapy. J Clin Onc. 2008; 26:2550-2557.Skiest DJ, Crosby C. Survival is prolonged by highly active antiretroviral therapy in AIDS patients with primary central nervous system lymphoma. AIDS. 2003; 17:1787-1793.Stebbing J, Sanitt A, Nelson M, Gazzard B, Bower M. A prognostic index for AIDS-associated Kaposi’s sarcoma in the era of highly active antiretroviral therapy. Lancet. 2006; 367:1495-1502.Uronis HE, Bendell JC. Anal cancer: an overview. The Oncologist. 2007; 12:524-534.Author Affiliation: San Diego Hospice at the Institute for Palliative Care, San Diego, California.ACGME Competencies: Medical KnowledgeKeywords: Prognosis
#215 Opioid Poorly Responsive Cancer PainAuthor(s): Tamara Sacks MD, David E Weissman MD, and Robert Arnold MDBackground Relief of cancer pain from opioids is rarely all or nothing; most patients experience some degree of analgesia alongside opioid toxicities. When the balance of analgesia versus toxicity tips away from analgesia, the term ‘opioid poorly-responsive pain’ is invoked. While opioid poorly-responsive pain is not a discreet syndrome, it is a commonly encountered clinical scenario. This Fast Fact reviews key points in its assessment and management.Differential Diagnosis of Opioid Poorly-Responsive PainCancer-related pain Cancer progression (new fracture at site of known bone metastases).Causes of pain (eg. neuropathic pain, skin ulceration, rectal tenesmus, muscle pain) that are known to be less responsive to systemic opioids or opioid monotherapy.Psychological/spiritual pain related to the cancer experience (existential pain of impending death). Opioid pharmacology/technical problems Opioid tolerance (rapid dose escalation with no analgesic effect).Dose-limiting opioid toxicity (sedation, delirium, hyperalgesia, nausea –seeFast Facts #25 ,142 ).Poor oral absorption (for PO meds) or skin absorption (e.g. transdermal patch adhesive failure).Pump, needle, or catheter problems (IV, subcutaneous, or spinal opioids). Non-cancer pain Worsening of a known non-cancer pain syndrome (diabetic neuropathy).New non-cancer pain syndrome (dental abscess). Other psychological problems Depression, anxiety, somatization, hypochondria, factitious disorders.Dementia and delirium both can effect a patient’s report of and experience of pain.Opioid substance use disorders or opioid diversion. Management StrategyInitial Steps Complete a thorough pain assessment including questions exploring psychological and spiritual concerns. If substance abuse or diversion is suspected, complete a substance abuse history (seeFast Facts #68 ,69 ).Complete a physical examination and order diagnostic studies as indicated.Escalate a single opioid until acceptable analgesia or unacceptable toxicity develop, or it is clear that additional analgesic benefit is not being derived from dose escalation. If this fails, consider: Rotating to a different opioid (e.g. morphine to methadone).Changing the route of administration (e.g. oral to subcutaneous). Treat opioid toxicities aggressively.Use (start or up-titrate) adjuvant analgesics, especially for neuropathic pain syndromes.Integrate non-pharmacological treatments such as behavioral therapies, physical modalities like heat and cold, and music and other relaxation-based therapies –seeFast Fact #211 . Additional steps – Pain refractory to the initial steps requires multi-disciplinary input and care coordination. Hospice/Palliative Medicine consultation to optimize pain assessment, drug management, and assessment of overall care goals.Mental health consultation for help in diagnosis and management of suspected psychological factors contributing to pain.Chaplain/Clergy assistance for suspected spiritual factors contributing to pain.Interventional Pain and/or Radiation Oncology consultation.Rehabilitation consultations (Physiatry, Physical and Occupational Therapy) to maximize physical analgesic modalities.Pharmacist assistance with drug/route information. ReferencesMercadante F, Portenoy RK. Opiate Poorly Responsive Cancer Pain Parts 1-3. J Pain Symptom Management. 2001; 21(2):144-150, 21(3):255-264, 24(4):338-354.Smith TJ, Staats PS, Deer T, et al. Randomized clinical trial of an implantable drug delivery system compared with comprehensive medical management for refractory cancer pain: impact on pain, drug-related toxicity, and survival. J Clin Oncol. 2002; 20(19):4040-9.Fallon M. When morphine does not work. Support Care Cancer. 2008; 16(7):771-5.Quigley C. Opioid switching to improve pain relief and drug tolerability. Cochrane Database of Systematic Reviews. 2004, Issue 3. Art. No.: CD004847. DOI: 10.1002/14651858.CD004847.Hanks GW. Opioid-responsive and opioid-non-responsive pain in cancer. Br Med Bull. 1991; 47(3):718-31.Hanks G, Forbes K. Opioid responsiveness. Acta Anaesthesiologica Scand.1997; 41:154-158.Author Affiliations: University of Pittsburgh Medical Center, Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania (TS, RA), and Medical College of Wisconsin, Milwaukee, Wisconsin (DEW).ACGME Competencies: Medical Knowledge, Patient CareKeywords: Communication, Pain – Evaluation, Pain – Opioids, Prognosis
#216 Asking about Cultural Beliefs in Palliative CareAuthor(s): Hillary Lum MD, PhD and Robert Arnold MDBackground Patients’ cultural backgrounds profoundly influence their preferences and needs regarding discussing bad news, decision-making, and the dying experience. This Fast Fact offers a framework for taking a ‘cultural history’ to better understand a patient’s and family’s needs. See also these relatedFast Facts : #17 (illness experience) ,#19 (spiritual history) ,#26 (explanatory model) ,#183&184 (conflict resolution).C – Communication. Identify the patient’s preferences regarding how and to whom medical information is shared.Some people want to know everything about their medical condition, and others do not. How much would you like to know? For those who request that the physician discuss their condition with family members:Would you like me to speak with them alone, or would you like to be present? Identify main contacts to give information to about the patient’s condition. Carefully explore with families requests to hide information from a patient (see references 4 and 5) – a future Fast Fact will address this topic in more detail.U – Unique cultural values. Use respectful, curious, and open-ended questions about a patient’s cultural heritage to identify their values.Is there anything that would be helpful for me to know about how you and your family view serious illness? Are there cultural beliefs, practices, or preferences that affect you during times of significant illness? If the patient is open to discussing death:What concerns do you have about dying? Are there things that are important to you or your family that I should know about?L – Locus of decision-making. For some patients medical decision-making is communally driven rather than individualistic. Multiple family members or a community elder or leader may need to be involved, often without prior official documentation because it is assumed or understood from the patient’s perspective.Do you prefer to make medical decisions about tests and treatments yourself, or would you prefer that others in your family or community make them for you?T – Translators. Language barriers are extremely challenging, especially during times of severe illness. Utilize medical interpreters frequently and effectively. Refer toFast Fact #154 for a detailed discussion on using interpreters in palliative care.U – Understanding the patient and learning as a provider. Reassess what is being heard, understood, and agreed upon frequently, from both the patient’s and clinician’s standpoint. Specifically confirm the patient’s understanding or agreement (beyond nodding or “yes” responses). This is particularly important if a medical translator is involved as miscommunication is common even when using trained medical interpreters – see reference (6).Can you tell me – in your own words – what you have heard from me and what’s most important to you about what I’ve said?R – Ritualized practices and restrictions. Determine if there are specific customs the patient desires to be followed. These must be communicated to other health care providers, especially in the hospital setting. It may be necessary to advocate for the patient and negotiate with healthcare facility administrators to find an agreeable way to honor a patient’s wishes.Are there specific practices that you would like to have in the hospital or at home? Are there aspects of medical care that you wish to forgo or have withheld because of your cultural beliefs? Is anything discouraged or forbidden? If the patient is approaching death, and willing to discuss it:Are there specific practices that are important to you at the time of death or afterwards that we should know about?E – Environment at home. Given that a majority of hospice care happens in the patient’s home environment, respectfully explore whether there are any needs that can be met by the health care system, and how open the patient, family or community is to receiving care at home. Recognize that patients may be hesitant to voice needs, or resistant to accepting help from outside the community. Even if a trusting, collaborative relationship has developed between a patient/family and clinicians in the hospital, this may not immediately translate into the home setting. With the patient’s permission, expectations about cultural-specific aspects of a patient’s care should be explicitly communicated to care providers outside the hospital.ReferencesSearight HR, Gafford J. Cultural diversity at the end of life: issues and guidelines for family physicians. Am Fam Phys. 2005; 71(3):515-522.Crawley LM, et al. Strategies for culturally effective end-of-life care. Ann Internal Med. 2002; 136:673-679.Maugans TA. The SPIRITual history. Arch Fam Med. 1997; 5:11-16.Arnold R. Palliative Care Case of the Month: The Family Says Not to Tell. University of Pittsburgh Institute to Enhance Palliative Care. May 2006. Available at: http://www.dom.pitt.edu/dgim/IEPC/case-of-the-month.html.Hallenbeck J, Arnold R. A request for non-disclosure: don’t tell mother. J Clin Oncol. 2007; 25(31):5030-4.Pham K, et al. Alterations during medical iInterpretation of ICU family conferences that interfere with or enhance communication. CHEST. 2008; 134(1):109-116.Author Affiliations: University of Pittsburgh Medical Center, Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania.ACGME Competencies: ProfessionalismKeywords: Communication
#217 Restless Leg SyndromeAuthors: Jennifer Johnson MD, PhD and Robert Arnold MDBackground Restless Leg Syndrome (RLS) is a neurologic disorder characterized by unpleasant sensations in the legs causing an uncontrollable urge to move when at rest in an effort to relieve those feelings. Between 2-15% of the population have RLS, with a peak incidence between 40 and 60 years of age and a 1:2 male:female ratio. It occurs more frequently in end-stage renal disease patients on chronic hemodialysis (up to 60%, depending on the series), and in patients with Parkinson’s disease (up to 20%) than in the general public. RLS disrupts sleep, can lead to excessive daytime sleepiness, depression, and a decreased quality of life. ThisFast Fact will review its evaluation and management.Causes The etiology of primary RLS is unknown although it is thought to be a genetic disorder involving either central or peripheral dopaminergic pathways. Common secondary causes of RLS are polyneuropathies; diabetes mellitus; rheumatologic diseases such as rheumatoid arthritis, Sjogren’s syndrome, and fibromyalgia; renal failure; pregnancy; iron deficiency; and hypo- or hyperthyroidism. Drugs including nicotine, caffeine, alcohol, 2nd generation antidepressants such as SSRIs and SNRIs, neuroleptic agents, dopamine-blocking antiemetics such as metoclopramide, and sedating antihistamines are all known to worsen RLS symptoms.Symptoms and Diagnosis The International RLS Study Group and the National Institutes of Health (NIH) criteria for diagnosis include: (1) an urge to move the legs, (2) temporary relief with movement, (3) onset or worsening of symptoms with rest or inactivity, and (4) worsening or onset of symptoms in the evening or night (3). Patients describe symptoms of trouble falling asleep, trouble getting back to sleep, 'a funny feeling in the legs,' or a 'creepy or crawly feeling in the legs.' Patients or their bed partners may also report ‘periodic limb movements of sleep’: stereotyped, repetitive flexion movements (‘jerking’) of the legs and occasionally arms, exacerbated when patients lie down for prolonged periods. RLS is a clinical diagnosis for which there is not a confirmatory diagnostic test. It should be differentiated from akathisia, a constant and generalized feeling of motor restlessness not associated with leg discomfort or rest. It can be differentiated from peripheral neuropathies, lumbosacral radiculopathy, and ordinary leg cramps by its circadian rhythm, relief with movement, and the prominence of pain symptoms in non-RLS syndromes.Treatment Address any treatable secondary causes of RLS (e.g. with iron repletion or levothyroxine) and work with patients to avoid drugs and medications known to aggravate RLS. Distraction activities such as playing video games or crossword puzzles can decrease symptoms during wakeful periods. Drug treatment is recommended for patients who have not improved despite conservative interventions or who have persistent, distressing symptoms. Given the paucity of studies comparing different drugs, experts recommend the following (14):Dopamine agonists : The most frequently used drugs are the dopamine agonists,pramipexole and ropinirole . Both have been determined to be effective in industry-funded, double-blind, placebo-controlled studies (7, 8). Doses as low as 0.125 mg of pramipexole at bedtime or 0.25 mg of ropinirole are effective in improving sleep and decreasing discomfort in mild-to-moderate cases. Doses of greater than 0.75 mg/day of pramipexole or 4 mg/day of ropinirole are of unproven benefit. Side effects are usually mild, transient, and limited to nausea, lightheadedness, and fatigue. Both drugs cost roughly $100 (US) a month at the starting dose. While there are small series showing the effectiveness of levodopa/carbidopa, experts have recommended it only be used for intermittent RLS because of worries that levodopa may cause augmentation, rebound, or recurrence of symptoms. Finally, cabergoline, a dopamine agonist with a long half life may be useful for patients who experience rebound symptoms with shorter acting agents, although it is not FDA approved for this purpose.Other agents : There are small studies indicating that benzodiazepines (9), opioids (10), and select anticonvulsants such as gabapentin and carbamazepine (11, 12, 13) are effective in RLS. Expert opinion, however, generally recommends these drugs as second line agents due to the paucity of data supporting their use relative to dopamine agonists, side effects, and risk of abuse.ReferencesPhillips B, Young T, Finn L, et al. Epidemiology of restless legs symptoms in adults.Arch Intern Med . 2000; 160:2137-2141.Zucconi M, Ferini-Strambi L. Epidemiology and clinical findings of restless legs syndrome.Sleep Med . 2004; 5:293-299.Allen RP, Picchietti D, Hening WA, et al. Restless legs syndrome: diagnostic criteria, special considerations, and epidemiology. A report from the restless legs syndrome diagnosis and epidemiology workshop at the National Institutes of Health.Sleep Med . 2003; 4:101-119.Connor JR, Wang XS, Patton SM, et al. Decreased transferrin receptor expression by neuromelanin cells in restless legs syndrome.Neurology . 2004; 62:1563-1567.Pittock SJ, Parrett T, Adler CH, et al. Neuropathology of primary restless leg syndrome: absence of specific tau- and alpha-synuclein pathology.Mov Disord . 2004; 19:695-699.Silber MH, Richardson JW. Multiple blood donations associated with iron deficiency in patients with restless legs syndrome.Mayo Clin Proc . 2003; 78:52-54.Montplaisir J, Nicolas A, Denesle R, Gomez-Mancilla B. Restless legs syndrome improved by pramipexole: a double-blind randomized trial.Neurology .1999; 52:938-943.Adler CH, Hauser RA, Sethi K, et al. Ropinirole for restless legs syndrome: a placebo-controlled crossover trial.Neurology . 2004; 62:1405-1407.Peled R, Lavie P. Double-blind evaluation of clonazepam on periodic leg movements in sleep.J Neurol Neurosurg Psychiatry. 1987; 50:1679-1681.Ondo WG. Methadone for refractory restless legs syndrome.Mov Disord . 2005; 20:345-348.Telstad W, Sorensen O, Larsen S, et al. Treatment of the restless legs syndrome with carbamazepine: a double blind study.BMJ. 1984; 288:444-446.Garcia-Borreguero D, Larrosa O, de la Llave Y, et al. Treatment of restless legs syndrome with gabapentin: a double-blind, cross-over study.Neurology . 2002; 59:1573-1579.Eisensehr I, Ehrenberg BL, Rogge Solti S, Noachtar S. Treatment of idiopathic restless legs syndrome (RLS) with slow-release valproic acid compared with slow-release levodopa/benserazide.J Neurol . 2004; 251:579-583.Silber MH, Ehrenberg BL, Allen RP, et al. An algorithm for the management of restless legs syndrome.Mayo Clin Proc. 2004; 79(7):916-22.Author Affiliations: University of Pittsburgh Medical Center, Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania.Purpose: Self-Study Guide, Teaching Audience(s)Training: Fellows, 3rd/4th Year Medical Students, PGY1 (Interns), PGY2-6, Physicians in PracticeSpecialty: Anesthesiology, Emergency Medicine, Family Medicine, General Internal Medicine, Geriatrics, Hematology/Oncology, Neurology, OB/GYN, Ophthalmology, Pulmonary/Critical Care, Pediatrics, Psychiatry, Surgery.Non-Physician: NursesACGME Competencies: Patient careCategories: Non-pain symptoms and syndromes
#218 Managing Wound OdorAuthor(s): Bansari Patel APN and Deon Cox-Hayley DOBackground Foul-smelling non-healing wounds are common in patients nearing the end-of-life, whether from pressure ulcers, vascular disease, or tumors. Strong wound odors can lead to social and physical isolation, altered patient body image and self-worth, and can challenge caregivers. This Fast Fact will discuss a practical approach to ameliorating wound odors. See alsoFast Facts#40 and#41 (pressure ulcers),#46 (malignant wounds), and#185 (topical opioids).Pathophysiology Most wound odors are thought to be due the metabolic processes of anaerobic bacteria, which colonize devitalized tissue. Deeper infection (e.g. cellulitis, necrotizing infections) are not necessary for significant odor generation.Management While it should be addressed, treatment of the underlying cause of the wound is often limited in patients with advanced illnesses. In all circumstances, attempts at ameliorating wound odor are important - whether by treating the cause of the odor or hiding the odor. Addressing the cause of the odor:Remove the wound bed contaminants (e.g. debride the wound of necrotic tissue).Control infection . There are several approaches, all aimed at controlling anaerobic growth.Topical Metronidazole is available as a commercially produced gel. Metronidazole gel is applied directly to the wound once or twice daily. Studies have shown decreases in wound odor in 2-3 days, and application is usually continued for up to 2 weeks. Courses can be repeated if needed. In one study, 63% of patients had complete eradication of odor after a course of metronidazole gel, with the remainder reporting improvements. Costs can range from dollars for compounded gels to ~$45-$75 for 45 gm of commercial gel. Metronidazole tablets can also be broken and the powder contents sprinkled into the wound. Applying dressings soaked in a mixture of normal saline and metronidazole has also been reported as helpful for controlling odor.Systemic Metronidazole can be used if there is evidence of deep tissue infection causing foul odor. 500 mg 3 or 4 times daily IV or orally is used, instead of or in addition to topical metronidazole. Systemic side effects such as nausea and diarrhea can occur.Topical Silver Sulfadiazine has been shown to be helpful in controlling odors of superficial wounds.Cadexomer Iodine is an antimicrobial agent containing slow release iodine and has been shown to decrease bacterial counts and odor from venous ulcers. Ointment, powder and impregnated bandage forms are available. Cadexomer iodine has the added benefit of absorbing exudate and can be particularly helpful when exudate absorption and odor control are both needed. It can cause a burning sensation upon application.Yogurt or buttermilk , applied for 15 minutes after a wound is cleaned, have been reported to control malignant wound odor, though studies are limited. They are thought to control bacterial proliferation by lowering a wound's pH.Honey can be bacteriocidal, and has been increasingly studied for wound healing. There is some evidence that it decreases odor. Hiding the odor:Aromatics : Scented candles, air freshener sprays, peppermint and other essential oils, coffee beans or grounds, and cider vinegar in a pan are all used to hide odors.Adsorbents: Charcoal adsorbs aromatic molecules. A basket of charcoal (briquettes) can be placed discreetly in a patient's room. Various commercially available charcoal dressings are also available, although expensive. These dressings are applied over the primary dressing and may be re-used as long as they remain dry. Baking soda can be applied between dressing layers to help absorb odor. Cat litter can also be used similarly to charcoal briquettes.Support and Education There can be great psychosocial distress associated with malodorous wounds: embarrassment, shame, and isolation. In addition to wound care specialists, psychological and spiritual support services can be important in helping patients and families cope with a chronic wound. Educate the patient and caregivers about the management of chronic wounds, and commit to controlling odor as much as possible. Health care providers should be trained to avoid demonstrating distress at odors in front of or in hearing distance of patients or families.ReferencesAlvarez O, Meehan M, Ennis W, et al. Chronic Wounds: Palliative Management for the Frail Population Part III.Wounds. 2002; 14(8S):13-18.Bates-Jensen B, Seaman S, Early L. Skin Disorders: Tumor Necrosis, Fistulas, and Stomas. In: Ferrel B, Coyle N, eds. Textbook of Palliative Nursing. New York, NY: Oxford University Press; 2006: pp330-333.Cooper RA, Jenkins L. A comparison between medical grade honey and table honeys in relation to antimicrobial efficacy.Wounds. 2009; Issue 2 February. Available at:http://www.woundsresearch.com/content/a-comparison-between-medical-grade-honey-and-table-honeys-relation-antimicrobial-efficacy . Accessed May 12, 2009.Fonder M, Lazurus G, Cowan D, et al. Treating the chronic wound: A practical approach to the care of nonhealing wounds and wound care dressings.J Am Acad Dermatol . 2008; 58:185-206.Kalinski C, Schneph M, Laboy D, et al. Effectiveness of a Topical Formulation Containing Metronidazole for Wound Odor and Exudate Control.Wounds. 2005; 17(4):84-90.McDonald A, Lesage P. Palliative Management of Pressure Ulcers and Malignant Wounds in Patients with Advanced Illness.J Palliat Med. 2006; 9(2):285-295.Sussman C, Jensen-Bates B.Wound Care: A Collaborative Practice Manuel . Philadelphia, PA: Lippincott Williams & Wilkins; 2006.Author Affiliations: University of Chicago, Chicago, Illinois.Purpose: Self-Study Guide, Teaching Audience(s):Training: Fellows, 3rd/4th Year Medical Students, PGY1 (Interns), PGY2-6, Physicians in PracticeSpecialty: Anesthesiology, Emergency Medicine, Family Medicine, General Internal Medicine, Geriatrics, Hematology/Oncology, Neurology, OB/GYN, Ophthalmology, Pulmonary/Critical Care, Pediatrics, Psychiatry, SurgeryNon-Physician: NursesACGME Competencies: patient care, interpersonal and communication skills.Categories: non pain symptoms and cancer
#219 Responding to Requests for Non-Disclosure of Medical InformationAuthors : Elizabeth Chaitin DHCE and Drew A Rosielle MDBackground What do you do when a family member asks you not to tell your patient important medical information such as a diagnosis or prognosis? Requests for non-disclosure can represent a loving family’s efforts to protect a patient from emotional harm, an inaccurate assessment by the family about a patient’s preferences or emotional resilience, or an accurate reflection of how the patient would prefer to make decisions. ThisFast Fact will introduce readers to a practical approach to these clinical dilemmas.The Problem Contemporary medical ethics and professional standards dictate that patients have the right to choose the medical care that best allows them to meet their life goals. To make such choices requires they be fully informed of their condition, prognosis, and reasonable treatment options (seeFast Facts #164 ,165 ). One needs to differentiate the right to such information from the duty to hear the information, however. Patients have different preferences for medical decision-making, ranging from individualistic, to paternalistic (doing whatever the physician recommends), to communal (sharing, or deferring, important medical decisions to family members or religious/community leaders). Truly respecting patient autonomy requires clinicians to identify and respect patient wishes to share or defer decision-making, including a patient’s preference to not be informed of key medical information.Prevention Negotiate with the patient before the results of testing arrive as to how much information they would like and who they would like to have present for information sharing.Are you the kind of person who wants to know the results of the test or would you rather I talk to your children?Managing Requests for Non-Disclosure (adapted from Hallenbeck and Arnold, 2007):Stay Calm . These situations can be confusing and emotional for clinicians. The calmer you remain the more information you will gain from the family as to why they do not want their loved one to be informed of the bad news. Demonstrating frustration or implying that the request is inappropriate can break trust and derail your efforts to resolve the situation.Try to understand the family’s viewpoint . They know the patient best and can provide insight into the cause of the request. Politely ask questions to understand the nature of the request.Can you tell me more about why you feel this way? How does your family typically handle difficult information? How are important decisions made by your family? Ask about how the patient has responded in the past to bad news and if they have made specific statements to others about what they want to know. Is the family more worried more about how the information is given rather than the information itself (e.g. given to the patient when alone, use of ‘death’ or ‘dying,’ the disclosure of specific prognostic time-frames)?Clarify what the patient already knows . Politely ask questions to understand what the family believes the patient already knows. Does the family think the patient already knows or strongly suspects what is going on and would rather not talk further about it, or is the patient completely in the dark? Have other clinicians already told or implied to the patient what is going on? How did the patient respond to that? Is the patient talking with the family about their concerns? A patient’s reluctance to talk with family members may represent an attempt to protect them.Respond empathically . A family’s request to not tell their loved ones usually comes from a kind and loving place; they are often frightened for themselves and the patient. Responding empathically (seeFast Fact #29 ) allows them to recognize that you care about them. It may allow them to see your ability to give information to their loved one in a compassionate way.State your views openly, but as your own views . Disclose any discomfort you have with the family’s request; explain your professional obligation to ensure the patient is able to make informed decisions in the manner they prefer. Disclose this specifically in the context of you wanting what is best for the patient, including respecting how she or he would like to hear information.Be willing to brainstorm possible solutions . Rigidly informing the family that you must tell the patient breaks trust and is inaccurate. There is no ‘one-size-fits-all’ solution to these scenarios. Often, there are solutions neither of you have thought about that will meet everyone’s goals. In other cases, the family may not have thought about the implications of the request (e.g. giving Mom chemotherapy but not telling her she has cancer).Negotiate a solution . Recommend to the family that you, in their presence, share with the patient a limited amount of information, and then specifically ask the patient if they would like to hear more. Tell the family what you plan on saying, i.e. –You came to the hospital because you were not eating well and became dehydrated. We have been trying to figure out what is going on. Some people want to know everything about their medical condition, others prefer the doctors talk with family members about what is happening and the best way to help a patient. What would you prefer? Contract with the family that they, and you, will respect the patient’s decision.ReferencesBok S.Lying: Moral Choice in Public and Private Life . New York ,NY : Vintage Books; 1989.Hallenbeck J, Arnold R. A request for nondisclosure: don’t tell mother.J Clin Oncol . 2007; 25(31):5030-34.Lagarde SM, Franssen SJ, van Werven JR, et al. Patient preferences for the disclosure of prognosis after esophagectomy for cancer with curative intent.Ann Surg Oncol . 2008; 15(11):3289-3298.Author Affiliations : University of Pittsburgh Medical Center, Pittsburgh, PA (EC); Medical College of Wisconsin, Milwaukee, WI (DAR).
#220 HypodermoclysisAuthors: Arif H Kamal MD and Eduardo Bruera MDBackground ThisFast Fact discusses subcutaneous fluid infusions, also known as hypodermoclysis (HDC). The use of parenteral hydration in dying patients is controversial and is discussed in Fast Fact #133 . While thisFast Fact discusses subcutaneous fluid infusions for purposes of hydration, similar techniques can also be used to deliver medications (see Fast Fact #28 ).Historical and Current Practice Hypodermoclysis was a widely accepted route for parenteral hydration in the 1940s and 1950s before falling out of favor after several reports of adverse reactions, likely related to the use of hypertonic and electrolyte-free solutions. Due to its ease of use, and subsequent research demonstrating its safety and efficacy, HDC has become more widely used. In the US, HDC is mostly used in geriatric and palliative care settings, although it is used more widely elsewhere in the world.HDC vs. Intravenous Hydration Decisions for parenteral hydration in dying patients are complex and individual decision making is paramount. When parenteral hydration is indicated, clinicians are generally faced with a decision to use HDC or intravenous (IV) hydration (seeFast Fact #134 ). Advantages of HDC over IV : Starting and maintaining a subcutaneous infusion catheter is relatively pain-free. It can be done by trained patients or family caregivers, preventing the need for frequent skilled nursing visits or trips to medical centers to maintain a working IV. HDC provides greater potential sites for needle placement (arm, back, abdomen, thighs), and equipment costs are generally lower than with IVs. Subcutaneous catheters can be easily disconnected from IV tubing and re-used later, allowing a patient to receive intermittent fluid treatments. Portable infusion devices are not needed with HDC. HDC infusions may also cause less agitation in patients with dementia versus IV (1).Disadvantages : HDC is limited by a continuous infusion rate of 1-2 ml/min or 1.5-3 L/day (2). This is adequate for most clinical situations, and additional catheters can be added if needed. Bolus infusions (up to 500 ml/hour) are possible with HDC, but often require hyaluronidase (see below). Both HDC and IV infusions have similar rates of local adverse events (e.g. erythema, cellulitis) and lifespan of infusion site (3). HDC can be technically difficult in patients with substantial peripheral edema, as well as in cachectic patients with little subcutaneous tissue. Patients and families may have pre-conceived attitudes about greater benefits with IV routes even while acknowledging increased burden (4). TechniqueEquipment needed : Small butterfly needle (usually 22 gauge) or angiocatheter, skin preparation (alcohol or iodine), sterile occlusive dressing, solution bag (saline or saline-dextrose combination), tubing with drip chamber. The use of electrolyte free solutions (e.g. 5% dextrose) is discouraged due to third-spacing risks which can cause tissue sloughing or rarely circulatory collapse.Procedure : After cleaning the local site, insert the needle bevel up into the subcutaneous tissue. Attach to fluid and tubing and cover with occlusive dressing. Select an infusion fluid and set drip rate or fluid bolus. Normal saline (NS) is typically used although half-normal saline or 2/3 D5W in 1/3 NS have been used in clinical practice. Drip rates can be set to 20-125 ml/hour with gravity (no pump required) or 1-2 ml/minute. Some patients may prefer drips set to gravity 24 hours per day at a low rate (e.g. 50 ml/hour), overnight hydration (e.g. 100 ml/hour), or intermittent fluid boluses (e.g. 500 ml). The volume of infusion needed to keep acceptable levels of hydration in many palliative care patients is lower than healthy patients and postulated to be ~1 L/day (5). No evidence exists for the frequency of site change. Some change only when there are symptoms or needle displacement while others choose a fixed time (e.g. every 3 or 7 days) or fluid volume (e.g. every 1.5 L) Teflon cannulas, although expensive, can be used for a week and are helpful for patients who have trouble maintaining a catheter site (6). Local anesthetic creams may be helpful during catheter placement to reduce discomfort, especially in children.Recombinant human hyaluronidase : RHH is an enzyme that temporarily lyses the subcutaneous interstitial space to promote diffusion of fluid. It can be used for site discomfort or if a faster rate of absorption is desired. Previous preparations were of bovine origin and were associated with local allergic reactions, anaphylaxis, and pain, making its role controversial. RHH has shown no human allergenicity (7). Recent studies have investigated RHH versus placebo in a randomized trial with gravity-driven infusion. The RHH group showed higher obtainable fluid rates, decreased discomfort, and similar local reactions. Doses of 150 U to 750 U given as steady push prior to the infusion can yield fluid rates of 380 to 520 ml/hour (8). Cautions Uncommon local reactions include edema, local pain, or erythema. Interventions include slowing the rate, changing the site, or using RHH. Rare complications include cellulitis and vascular puncture. Systemic complications such as pulmonary edema can occur with all types of parenteral hydration.References O'Keeffe ST, Lavan JN. Subcutaneous fluids in elderly hospital patients with cognitive impairment.Gerontology. 1996; 42(1):36-39. Berger EY. Nutrition by hypodermoclysis.J Am Geriatr Soc. 1984; 32(3):199-203. Slesak G, Schnurle JW, Kinzel E, Jakob J, Dietz PK. Comparison of subcutaneous and intravenous rehydration in geriatric patients: a randomized trial.J Am Geriatr Soc. 2003; 51(2):155-160. Mercadante S, Ferrera P, Girelli D, Casuccio A. Patients' and relatives' perceptions about intravenous and subcutaneous hydration.J Pain Symptom Manage. 2005; 30(4):354-358. Dalal S, Bruera E. Dehydration in cancer patients: to treat or not to treat.J Support Oncol. 2004; 2(6):467-479, 483. Macmillan K, Bruera E, Kuehn N, Selmser P, Macmillan A. A prospective comparison study between a butterfly needle and a Teflon cannula for subcutaneous narcotic administration.J Pain Symptom Manage. 1994; 9(2):82-84. Yocum RC, Kennard D, Heiner LS. Assessment and implication of the allergic sensitivity to a single dose of recombinant human hyaluronidase injection: a double-blind, placebo-controlled clinical trial.J Infus Nurs. 2007; 30(5):293-299. Thomas JR, Yocum RC, Haller MF, von Gunten CF. Assessing the role of human recombinant hyaluronidase in gravity-driven subcutaneous hydration: the INFUSE-LR study.J Palliat Med. 2007; 10(6):1312-1320. Author Affiliations: Mayo Clinic, Rochester, MN (AK) and University of Texas M.D. Anderson Cancer Center, Houston, TX (EB).
#221 Treatment of Pain in Patients Taking Buprenorphine for Opioid AddictionAuthors: Julie W Childers MD and Robert Arnold MDBackground ThisFast Fact discusses treating pain in patients using buprenorphine for opioid addiction. Buprenorphine is a mixed opioid agonist/antagonist, available in the United States in the sublingual form as 'Subutex,' and formulated with naloxone as 'Suboxone.' It is approved for treatment of opioid addiction in the US; such use is restricted to qualified physicians who have received training and a waiver to practice medication-assisted opioid addiction therapy. Over the last seven years, over 10,000 physicians have been approved to use buprenorphine, with 2,103,000 prescriptions filled in 2007. Given this, clinicians are likely to encounter patients on buprenorphine therapy who also require treatment for pain.Note: buprenorphine is also used as an analgesic, particularly in Europe, where a transdermal system is available. Currently it is uncommonly used in the US as an analgesic. Naloxone has minimal sublingual bioavailability and is included only to prevent abuse by intravenous injection; in thisFast Fact 'buprenorphine' refers to both sublingual products.Pharmacology Buprenorphine binds to mu-opioid receptors tightly but with low intrinsic activity, providing some analgesic effects but effectively preventing other opioids from binding. This 'blocks' the analgesic and euphoric effects of other opioids, leading to its effectiveness in opioid addiction therapy. Buprenorphine's effect at the mu-opioid receptor lasts 24 to 60 hours, and can lengthen even further with increasing doses. The duration of sublingual buprenorphine's analgesic effects is shorter than its occupation of the receptor - between 6 and 12 hours. When patients on buprenorphine therapy for addiction are in acute pain, the continued interaction of buprenorphine with opioid receptors can limit other opioids' analgesic effectiveness.Pain Management Strategies While there are no clinical studies addressing how to treat pain in patients taking buprenorphine, the strategies below are derived from expert opinion, animal studies, federal guidelines, and international experience treating breakthrough pain in patients using transdermal buprenorphine (not available in the US). As with all patients with pain, non-pharmacologic therapies and non-opioid analgesics should be used when safe and likely to work. The following strategies should be chosen and implemented in close collaboration with the physician treating the patient's opioid addiction.If acute pain is anticipated, such as for an elective surgical procedure, adjuvant analgesics and interventional procedures such as nerve blocks should be provided as available. For patients with moderate to severe pain who are expected to require opioid analgesic therapy for the short term, federal guidelines recommend holding the buprenorphine and starting short acting opioid agonists. While the buprenorphine's effects diminish (20-60 hours), the patient may require higher opioid doses to compete with the presence of buprenorphine on mu-opioid receptors. The patient should be monitored carefully in the initial period to titrate the opioid agonist dose downward as its effect becomes greater. Before restarting buprenorphine, the patient should be opioid-free for 12-24 hours to avoid precipitating withdrawal. This process should be overseen by an approved buprenorphine provider. For patients with mild to moderate acute pain, consider treating the pain with buprenorphine alone. The total daily dose of buprenorphine can be increased (to a maximum of 32 mg sublingual/day); it should be given in divided doses every 6-8 hours. Another option is to continue buprenorphine and use short-acting opioid agonists at high enough doses to overcome buprenorphine's partial agonism. Opioids that have a higher intrinsic activity at the mu-opioid receptor, including morphine, fentanyl, or hydromorphone, are all options, while opioids with less efficacy such as hydrocodone or codeine should be avoided. In a patient who is expected to have an ongoing need for pain management, consider replacing buprenorphine with methadone therapy for opioid addiction. For analgesia, additional methadone or other 'full' mu-opioid receptor agonists can then be added without problems related to use of a partial opioid agonist. Patients who have life-limiting illnesses that are expected to cause significant pain are not good candidates for buprenorphine therapy for addiction. A collaborative approach, including patient preference and discussion with both addiction and pain or palliative care specialists, will best identify a therapeutic plan to achieve adequate pain relief and maintain recovery from addiction. Author Affiliations: University of PittsburghMedicalCenter, Pittsburgh, PA.References Alford DP, et al. Acute pain management for patients receiving maintenance methadone or buprenorphine therapy.Ann Intern Med. 2006; 144:127-134. Center for Substance Abuse Treatment.Clinical Guidelines for the Use of Buprenorphine in the Treatment of Opioid Addiction . Treatment Improve ment Protocol (TIP) Series 40. DHHS Publication No. (SMA) 04-3939. Rockville, MD: Substance Abuse and Mental Health Services Administration, 2004. Availableonline . Accessed June 25, 2009. Heit HA, Gourlay DL. Buprenorphine: new tricks with an old molecule for pain management.Clin J Pain. 2008; 24:93-97. Helm S, et al. Opioid antagonists, partial agonists, and agonists/antagonists: the role of office-based detoxification.Pain Physician . 2008; 11:225-235. Johnson RE, Fudula PJ, Payne R. Buprenorphine: considerations for pain management.J Pain Symptom Manage. 2005; 29(3):297-326.Kögel B ,Christoph T ,Strassburger W ,Friderichs E . Interaction of mu-opioid receptor agonists and antagonists with the analgesic effect of buprenorphine in mice.Eur J Pain.2005; 9(5):599-611.Mark, TL, KassedCA, Vandivort-Warren R, et al. Alcohol and opioid dependence medications: prescription trends, overall and by physician specialty.Drug Alcohol Depend . 2009; 99: 345-349.Mercadante S ,Villari P ,Ferrera P , et al. Safety and effectiveness of intravenous morphine for episodic breakthrough pain in patients receiving transdermal buprenorphine.J Pain Symptom Manage.2006; 32(2):175-9. Schumacher MA, Basbaum AI, Way WL. Opioid analgesics and antagonists. In: Katzung BG, ed.Basic and clinical pharmacology . New York, NY: McGraw-Hill; 2007.
#222 Preparing for the Family MeetingAuthors: David E. Weissman, MD, Timorthy E. Quill, MD, and Robert M. Arnold, MDBackground A cornerstone procedure in Palliative Medicine is leadership of family meetings to establish goals of care, typically completed at a time of patient change in status, where the value of current treatments needs to be re-evaluated. As with any procedure, preparation is essential to ensure the best outcome. ThisFast Fact reviews how to prepare for a Family Meeting. See alsoFast Fact #16 for a concise overview of family meetings, as well asFast Facts 223-227 for discussion of additional aspects of family conferences.Data Review Review the medical history relevant to the current medical situation (e.g. history of disease progression, symptom burden, past treatments, treatment-related toxicity, and prognosis). Review all current treatments (e.g. renal dialysis, artificial nutrition, antibiotics) and any positive and/or negative treatment effects. Review all treatment options being proposed Determine the prognosis with and without continued disease-directed treatments. Prognostic information includes data concerning future patient function (physical/cognitive), symptom burden, and time (longevity). Solicit and coordinate medical opinions about the utility of current treatments among consultants and the primary physician. If possible, families need to hear a single medical consensus—all relevant clinicians should be contacted and consensus reached prior to the meeting. If the consultants do not agree, then prior to the family meeting they should meet to negotiate these differences and attempt to reach consensus regarding the plan. If there is no consensus, a plan should be developed for how to describe these differences to families. If the patient lacks capacity, review any Advance Directive(s), with special attention to discover if the patient has named a surrogate decision maker, and if the patient has indicated any specific wishes (e.g. DNR status, ‘no feeding tubes’). Seek out patient/family psychosocial data. Focus on psychological issues and family dynamics (e.g. anger, guilt, fear) potentially impacting decision making. These issues may be long-standing, or due to the current illness.Note: talking to the patient’s social worker, bedside nurses, and primary and consulting physicians can help you get a better sense of the family and how they make decisions.Review what transpired in prior family meetings. Learn about particular cultural/religious values and/or or social/financial issues that may impact decision making.Information Synthesis Based on your review of the medical and prognostic data, make an independent determination of which current and potential tests/treatments will improve, worsen, or have no impact on the patient’s function/quality of life (physical/cognitive) and time (longevity).Meeting Leadership Leading a family meeting requires considerable flexibility to ensure that all relevant participants have the opportunity to have their points of view expressed. Though it is useful to have one person designated as the main orchestrator and coordinator of the meeting, the essential skills for making a family meeting successful can come from more than one participant. These skills include:·Group facilitation skills.·Counseling skills.·Knowledge of medical and prognostic information.·Willingness to provide leadership/guidance in decision making.Invitations A decisional patient can be asked who he/she wants to participate from his/her family/community, including faith leaders; in general it is wise not to set any arbitrary limits on the number of attendees. The medical care team should likewise decide who they want to participate.Note: it is important not to overwhelm a family with too many health professionals. On the other hand, a physician from the primary team as well as a nurse and social worker should attend when possible; these individuals can help ensure the consistency of information as well as help deal with complicated dynamics. If the patient has a long-time treating physician whom he/she trusts, this person should ideally be present.Setting The ideal setting is private and quiet, with chairs arranged in a circle or around a table. Everyone should be able to sit down if they wish. For non-decisional patients, the clinical team should negotiate with the surrogate whether or not to have the meeting in the presence of the patient.The Pre-Meeting Meeting The participating health care members should meet beforehand to confirm: a) the goals for the meeting (e.g. information sharing, specific decisions sought), b) who will be the meeting leader to start the meeting, and c) likely sources of conflict and initial management strategies.References . New York, NY: Cambridge University Press; 2009.1. Back A, Arnold R, Tulsky J.Mastering communication with seriously ill patients: balancing honesty with empathy and hope Curtis JR, Patrick DL, Shannon SE, et al. The family conference as a focus to improve communication about end-of-life care in the intensive care unit: opportunities for improvement.Crit Care Med . 2001; 29(2 Suppl):N26-33. Lautrette A, Ciroldi M, Ksibi H, Azoulay E. End-of-life family conferences: rooted in the evidence.Crit Care Med . 2006; 34(11):S364-S372. King DA, Quill T. Working with families in palliative care: one size does not fit all.J Pall Med. 2006; 9:704-715. Weiner JS, Roth J. Avoiding iatrogenic harm to patient and family while discussing goals of care near the end of life.J Pall Med . 2006; 9:451-463. Weissman DE. Decision making at a time of crisis near the end of life.JAMA . 2004; 292:1738-1743. Author Affiliations: Medical College of Wisconsin, Milwaukee, WI (DEW); University of Rochester Medical Center, Rochester, NY (TEQ); University of Pittsburgh School of Medicine, UPMC Health System, Pittsburgh, PA (RMA).
#223 The Family Meeting: Starting the ConversationAuthors: David E Weissman MD, Timothy Quill MD, and Robert M Arnold MDBackgroundFast Fact#16 gives a concise overview of running a family meeting.Fast Fact# 222 provides a list of preparatory steps in planning for a family meeting to discuss end-of-life goals; thisFast Fact reviews the early steps of the actual meeting.Introductions & setting goals for the meetingThe meeting leader begins the meeting by introducing him or herself, and suggesting that each person present (medical team and family/community) introduce themselves including their relationship to the patient.The meeting leader should summarize the meeting goals (e.g.We are here to discuss next steps in the care of Mr. Jones ) and ask the family to confirm these goals and/or add other agenda items.Note: if you do not know the patient or family well, take a moment to build relationship. Ask a non-medical question such asI am just getting to know you. I had a chance to look at your chart and learn about your medical condition but it does not say much about your life before you got sick. Can you tell us about the things you liked to do before you got sick? Similarly, if the patient is not able to participate in the meeting, ask family to describe the patient prior to his becoming ill:As we get started, can you describe what Mr. Jones was like before he became ill?Determine what the patient/family already knows This step is essential as it guides you in providing a synthesis of the medical information (see below). Always invite the patient and all family members to provide their understanding of the medical information.Examples of opening lines:Tell me what the doctors have told you about your condition? Can you describe for me your sense of how things are going? For patients who have been declining from a chronic illness, you can ask: Tell me about the past 3-6 months: what types of changes have you noted? The patient or family will typically describe changes in terms of function (physical or cognitive) and quality of life. The Medical Review Once you know what the patient/family understands, you are in a good position to confirm their understanding, or provide new information/correct misunderstandings.First, ask if you can bring them up-to-date about what is going on; asking shows politeness and also signals that they should attend to what you are trying to say. The clinician most closely aligned with the patient’s ongoing treatment should begin this discussion, supplemented with information from consulting services if relevant. Do not provide information using medical jargon or in an organ system approach (e.g.,The creatinine is improving, but there is a new pleural effusion and the heart rate has become irregular ).A more patient-centered approach is to provide a succinct summary of the current condition, without any medical jargon, focusing on the issues of most importance, which are usually function/quality/time. Give a ‘bottom-line’ statement: ‘getting worse,’ ‘not going to improve,’ ‘dying and time is likely very short.’The worsening weakness and pain you describe is from the cancer which is growing despite the chemotherapy.You are telling me that despite the recent hospitalization, you are not able to do as much around the house; unfortunately your lung disease is getting worse despite all our best treatments. Despite our best efforts, your wife’s brain injury from the car crash is getting worse. She can no longer stay awake or move her arms/legs. Using the ‘D word’ if relevant: when a patient is clearly deteriorating and death is likely within the next days to weeks, or even a few months, it is appropriate to use the worddying in the conversation. Both patients and surrogates find that saying the worddying , if done compassionately, is helpful in clearing what is often a confusing and frightening situation.I’m afraid we have run out of options to shrink the cancer. Based on your declining function, I believe you are dying.Silence Whether or not you use the worddying , when you have presented bad news (such as information about disease progression), the next step is for you to allow silence, and let the family/patient respond. In truth, no matter what you might imagine the response from the patient/family to be once the bad news is delivered, you really cannot predict their emotional reaction (e.g. relief, anxiety, anger, regret, fear). This silence can be uncomfortable; resist the urge to fill it with more facts as they will not be heard. Not all patients/families express emotions at this point and instead respond practically (Well, what happens next then? ). This is fine, but you need to wait, silently, to see what response the patient/family demonstrates. In addition, even practical questions have underlying emotions (Are you sure? Or –There must be something you can do? ). It is important to respond to both the factual aspect of the question (Yes I am sure. Or –There are no more effective treatments available .), as well as the emotional level (I wish I had better news for you. Or –I wish our treatments worked better than they do.).When the patient/surrogates openly acknowledge that current treatments are no longer effective, that death is coming, they will generally ask one or all of the following questions:How long? What will happen? Will there be suffering? What do we do now? Your response at this point should be to address prognosis in terms of time, function, and symptoms, as best you can (seeFast Facts #13,141,143,149,150). This will answer the first two questions; the last questions will require more discussion of patient-centered goals (seeFast Fact #227).ReferencesBack A, Arnold R, Tulsky J.Mastering communication with seriously ill patients: balancing honesty with empathy and hope. New York, NY: Cambridge University Press; 2009. Quill TE, Townsend P. Bad news: delivery, dialogue and dilemmas.Arch Intern Med . 1991; 151:463-468.Curtis JR, Patrick DL, Shannon SE, et al. The family conference as a focus to improve communication about end-of-life care in the intensive care unit: opportunities for improvement.Crit Care Med . 2001; 29(2 Suppl):N26-33.Lautrette A, Ciroldi M, Ksibi H, Azoulay E. End-of-life family conferences: rooted in the evidence.Crit Care Med . 2006; 34(11):S364-S372.King DA, Quill T. Working with families in palliative care: one size does not fit all.J Pall Med. 2006; 9:704-715.Quill TE, Arnold RM, Platt FW. 'I wish things were different': Expressing wishes in response to loss, futility, and unrealistic hopes.Ann Intern Med . 2001; 135:551-555. Author Affiliations: Medical College of Wisconsin, Milwaukee, WI (DEW); University of Rochester Medical Center, Rochester, NY (TEQ); University of Pittsburgh School of Medicine, UPMC Health System, Pittsburgh, PA (RMA).
#224 Responding to Emotion in Family MeetingsAUTHORS: David E Weissman MD, Timothy E Quill MD, and Robert M Arnold MDBackground Family meetings are stressful events, often provoking strong emotional reactions. Fast Fact #29 presents a general outline on the topic of how clinicians can respond to emotions. TheFast Fact will provide a more detailed approach to emotions that arise during family meetings.Consider your role. It is important to reflect on the role of clinicians in responding to patient/family emotions at the time life-altering information is shared. The goal is not to prevent a patient/family from having those emotions. Sadness, fear, anger, and loss are normal responses to unwelcome news. Instead your role is: 1) to maintain a trusting therapeutic relationship and safe/supportive environment that allows emotions to be expressed in a way that meets the patient's/family's needs; and 2) not to worsen the experience for the patient/family by ignoring or delegitimizing their responses, or confusing them with medical information when they are not ready to hear it. Recognize that most families find clinicians' expressions of empathy tremendously supportive and these are associated with family satisfaction.Acknowledge that emotion is being expressed. If you have a good sense of what the emotion is, then it is useful to name it. If not, using more general language is preferable. I can see this is really affecting you.This information is very upsetting Legitimize the appropriateness and normalcy of the reaction. Medical professionals are in a powerful position to help patients and families feel that strong emotions under these circumstances are normal and to be expected. Anyone receiving this news would feel devastated.It is completely expected to be very distressed by this kind of news. Explore more about what is underneath the emotion. It is tempting to try to limit the emotion, and be prematurely reassuring. But it is generally more helpful and ultimately more time-efficient to allow the patient and family to more deeply explore their feelings and reactions. Tell me what is the scariest (most difficult) part for you.Tell me more about that…. (Keep the exploration going until it is fully expressed and understood.) Empathize (if you genuinely feel it). Empathy means being able to emotionally imagine what the patient is going through. Clinicians can initiate the prior responses (acknowledge, legitimize, explore) without having a clear feeling for the patient's experience. These responses can be adequate in themselves. If the clinician cannot imagine the patient's experience, he or she can still sensitively explore the experience and provide caring and support. But if you have a strong sense of what the patient is experiencing, it can be very therapeutic to express it.This seems really unfair. I can imagine that you might feel very disappointed. Explore strengths/coping strategies. This may occur at this phase of the interview, or it may be postponed to a later phase when planning for next steps begins. In past circumstances, what has helped?How have you adapted to difficult circumstances in the past?What are you hoping for now? References Back A, Arnold R, Tulsky J.Mastering communication with seriously ill patients: balancing honesty with empathy and hope. New York, NY: Cambridge University Press; 2009. Suchman AL, Markakis K, Beckman HB, Frankel R. A model of empathic communication in the medical interview.JAMA . 1997; 277:678-682. Hardee JT. An overview of empathy.The Permanente Journal . 2003; 7(online). Available at:http://xnet.kp.org/permanentejournal/fall03/cpc.html . Accessed August 5, 2009. Author Affiliations: Medical College of Wisconsin, Milwaukee, WI (DEW); University of Rochester Medical Center, Rochester, NY (TEQ); University of Pittsburgh School of Medicine, UPMC Health System, Pittsburgh, PA (RMA).
#225 The Family Meeting: Causes of ConflictAUTHORS: David E Weissman MD, Timothy E Quill MD, and Robert M Arnold MDBackground When family meetings are conducted with the goal of helping a patient/family cope with a shift in goals from life-sustaining treatments to a more comfort focused approach, communication can break down. ThisFast Fact reviews the common causes of conflict.Recognizing Conflict When the patient/surrogates are not psychologically ready to accept the limits of medical interventions or the finality of the impending death, you will hear comments such as these:There must be some mistake; I know there are other treatments available; We want a second opinion; We believe in miracles; She is fighter, she will never give up; There must be something (medically) you can do. Health professionals may interpret these statements as 'denial.' But the term denial, by itself, is insufficient to help the clinician understand what is causing the impasse. Understanding the cause is essential in planning an effective strategy to move beyond the conflict to meet the needs of the patient and surrogates.Information GapsInaccurate understanding of the patient's medical condition (e.g. overly optimistic or pessimistic prognosis).Inconsistent information (One doctor tells us one thing and another something else. ).Confusing information (e.g. use of medical jargon, multiple treatment options presented without a clear recommendation).Excessive information (well-meaning family/friends/clinicians providing information without full awareness of the problems).Genuine uncertainty (e.g., predicting functional outcome from a brain injury in its immediate aftermath may be impossible).Language/translation/cultural issues (We never tell someone they are dying in our culture. ).Treatment Goal ConfusionInconsistent treatments and unclear goals, often due to physician/patient/surrogate emotional issues (see below): Clinician initiated:We will keep your husband on blood pressure raising medicine but stop antibiotics. Family initiated:We want you to do CPR, but not intubate her.Differing priorities about disease-directed treatment and comfort-oriented treatment between clinicians and patient/family.Lack of clarity about goals when several things are going on simultaneously (advanced cancer, severe infection, respiratory failure -Isn't the pneumonia potentially treatable? )EmotionsGrief (I don't know how I will live without him. )Fear/anxiety (I don't want to be responsible for ending my father's life. My family will be angry at me for doing thi s. )Guilt (I haven't visited my sister in 20 years. I should have been here for her. )Anger (My mother was very abusive, I've never forgiven her; you are just giving up on her. )Hope (I'm still hoping and praying she can pull through this. )Family/Team dynamicsPatient/family conflicted within themselves; may want different things at different timesDysfunctional family system (family members unable to put the patient's needs/values/priorities above their own).Surrogate lack of ability (cognitive deficit, psychological/psychiatric trait/illness). In pediatrics, this can be conflict between what is in the best interest of a child vs. a caregiver or family.Consulting teams disagree about the optimal approach, putting the patient/family in the middle of the dispute.Relationship between the Clinician and the Patient/SurrogateLack of trust in the health care team/health care system.Past experiences where the patient has had a better outcome than predicted.Genuine value differences: Cultural/religious values concerning life, dying, and death.Clinician value of wanting to protect the patient from invasive, non-beneficial treatment while the family values wanting to prolong life no matter how much suffering it might entail.All of these issues represent a degree of conflict and will need to be addressed before proceeding to set end-of-life goals. SeeFast Facts #183,184 for additional discussion on managing conflict.Debriefing Conflicts are stressful for all involved health professionals. It is helpful to debrief the process - what went well, what could have been improved, and - most importantly - addressing the emotional reaction and needs of the care team. SeeFast Fact#203 on managing clinician emotions.ReferencesBack AL, Arnold RM. Dealing with conflict in caring for the seriously ill.JAMA . 2005; 293:1374-1381.Lazare A, Eisenthal S, Frank A. Clinician/Patient Relations II: Conflict and Negotiation. In: Lazare A, ed.Outpatient Psychiatry . Baltimore, MD: Williams and Wilkins; 1989.Fisher R, Ury W.Getting to Yes: Negotiating Agreement Without Giving In. Boston, MA: Houghton-Mifflin; 1981.Quill TE. Recognizing and adjusting to barriers in doctor-patient communication.Ann Intern Med . 1989; 111:51-57.Back A, Arnold R, Tulsky J.Mastering communication with seriously ill patients: balancing honesty with empathy and hope . New York, NY: Cambridge University Press; 2009.Author Affiliations: Medical College of Wisconsin, Milwaukee, WI (DEW); University of Rochester Medical Center, Rochester, NY (TEQ); University of Pittsburgh School of Medicine, UPMC Health System, Pittsburgh, PA (RMA).
#226 Helping Surrogates Make DecisionsAuthors: David E Weissman MD, Timothy E Quill MD, and Robert M Arnold MDBackground Surrogate decision makers are often placed in the difficult position of making what feels to them as life or death decisions. ThisFast Fact reviews an approach to help surrogates through the decision process when patients cannot participate in decision-making themselves.Surrogate decision making The surrogate’s role is clearly to exercise “substituted judgment” – that is, to make decisions as the patient would make them using the patient’s values and preferences as previously expressed. The challenge was clearly expressed by the New Jersey Supreme Court in the Quinlan case:if (the patient) could wake up for 15 minutes, understand his current medical situation completely, and then had to go backinto it, what would he tell us to do? In the case of children, surrogate decision makers (usually parents) are expected to make decisions that represent the child’s ‘best interests’; depending on the age and capacity of the child to participate in his/her own healthcare decision making, the applied ‘best interest’ judgment by the surrogate and healthcare providers may incorporate the patient’s values and preferences to the extent possible, or may be solely based on the decision maker’s interpretation of best interest. If there is conflict about what is in a child’s best interest, or in cases of developmentally disabled adults who have never had capacity, consultation from ethics and law may be appropriate, as the rules governing decision-making vary considerably.Helping surrogatesBefore making a recommendation, make sure there is a common understanding of the patient’s condition and prognosis. Following this, the next step is to try to understand the patient’s goals in light of these medical facts.Bring the patient’s “voice” into the decision process even if he/she cannot participate directly:If your father were sitting here with us, what would he say? If available, share a copy of any advance care planning document with the surrogate. Realize that it is common for the surrogate never to have seen the document.Whenever possible, frame the decision around the treatment goals (e.g. life prolongation, allowing a peaceful death) in light of the patient’s current condition, rather than focusing on very specific treatments (e.g. thoracentesis, antibiotics). The details of the medical plan should flow from the overall goals of care.Do not make the surrogate feel that they are taking full responsibility for medical decisions, especially those which may result in the death of their loved one (We can do option a or b; what would like me to do? ). Once you have a sense of the patient’s goals in light of his/her medical condition, offer to make a recommendation that reflects those goals.Note: Many families are looking for support and guidance from medical professionals, especially the physician.Given what you have told me about your mother, and what we know about her medical condition, I would recommend…. Start with what youare going to do to achieve the patient’s goals and then talk about what does not make sense given those goals. Remember, however, that some families may want information but not your recommendation. It is therefore important to offer your recommendation (Would it be helpful for me to say what medically makes the most sense, given what you’ve told me about your Dad?). Remember that we are talking about the potential death of the surrogate’s loved one. Emotions – sadness, frustration and guilt – are normal. Use previously discussed emotion management skills to acknowledge, legitimize, empathize and support the family’s emotional response (see Fast Facts#29 and#224 ).Do not argue over the facts; repeating the facts over and over again is not likely to be effective. When the surrogate saysHe is a fighter , acknowledge that he is and has really fought hard. The surrogate sayingI want you to do everything is as much a sign of emotional desperation as it is a factual request. Respond with empathy:It seems this is really hard for you . If hope for a miracle is expressed, it is appropriate to acknowledge that you hope for an unanticipated recovery as well, but that a miracle is truly what it would take at this point.Rather than reiterating what medicine cannot do, consider using “I wish” statements to keep you in touch with the surrogate’s feelings, while simultaneously expressing medicine’s limitations (I wish our medicines were more effective; I wish we had more medical treatment to offer than we do…). Recognize the importance of time and support for surrogates to do their necessary grief-work. Offer counseling services, either informal through the work of a palliative care team, or more formal resources available at your institution. Bring together your clinical care team and strategize potential resources for support such as chaplaincy, social services, psychology, palliative care or ethics consultation.Remember that time is your ally. The surrogate needs to process that their loved one is dying and conceptualize what life will be like without him or her. This grief work takes time and psychological support. Often, letting people think about what you have said and talking again over subsequent days provides them the space to do grief work. It also allows them to see for themselves that what you have advised is coming true (e.g. the patient is not getting better).ReferencesQuill TE, Brody H. Physician recommendations and patient autonomy: Finding a balance between physician power and patient choice.Ann Intern Med . 1996; 125:763-769.Quill TE, Arnold RM, Platt FW. 'I wish things were different': Expressing wishes in response to loss, futility, and unrealistic hopes.Ann Intern Med . 2001; 135:551-555.Fisher R, Ury W.Getting to Yes: Negotiating Agreement Without Giving In. Boston, MA: Houghton-Mifflin; 1981.Quill TE, Arnold RM, Back A. Discussing treatment preferences in patients who want 'everything'.Ann Intern Med . 2009; 151:345-349.Author Affiliations: Medical College of Wisconsin, Milwaukee, WI (DEW); University of Rochester Medical Center, Rochester, NY (TEQ); University of Pittsburgh School of Medicine, UPMC Health System, Pittsburgh, PA (RMA).
#227 The Family Meeting: End of Life Goal Setting and Future PlanningAUTHORS: David E Weissman MD, Timothy E Quill MD, and Robert M Arnold MDBackground End-of-life goal setting is a key palliative care skill, typically occurring as part of a family meeting (seeFast Facts #16, 65, 222-226). ThisFast Fact discusses an approach to goal setting when the expected length of life is short.Establishing patient-centered goals Here is an example of how to start the conversation (the patient should be given sufficient time to respond to each of these questions):I/we have discussed your current condition and that time may be short. With that in mind –What are you hoping for now? What is important to you? What do you need to accomplish? Who do you need to see in the time that is left?Common responses invoke family, home, and comfort; often surviving until a specific future family event/date or visit with a key family member is described as an important goal. Re-state your understanding:What I hear you saying is that you want to be home, comfortable, and survive until your daughter gives birth – you hope to meet your next grandchild .Note: if you believe the patient’s goal of survival to a specific event/date is not practical, it is important to say so and discuss alternative plans.Recommend a care plan based on the goals Once the goal(s) is/are established, you can then review the patient’s current treatments (e.g. antibiotics, chemotherapy), monitoring (e.g. pulse oximetry), planned tests (e.g. colonoscopy), and medications (e.g. anti-hypertensives), and decide which will help meet, or not, the patient’s goals. Anything that will not help meet the goals should be discussed for potential discontinuation. Depending on the specific disease/patient condition, other issues that are naturally discussed at this point include:Future hospitalizations, ICU admissions, laboratory and radiology tests.Resuscitation orders/code status (seeFast Facts #23 &#24 ).Current/future use of blood products, antibiotics, artificial hydration/nutrition.If present, the potential continuation or stopping of dialysis or cardiac devices.Role of a second (or third) opinion.Exploration of experimental therapy.Exploration of treatment options the patient or family may bring into the conversation.Disposition options to best meet the goals (e.g. home hospice referral).Note: There isno need to ask about each option as a yes/no question (Do you want blood products? ). Based on what you know about the patient’s goals, make a recommendation about what should and should not be done in light of the patient’s goals, condition and prognosis. If you are unsure, you can explore the issue with the patient/family (Given that your dad wanted to get home as soon as possible and yet he was also willing to do easy things that might help him live longer, I am unsure whether it makes sense to stay in the hospital an extra day or two to finish the antibiotics. What do you think he would say? ).‘Long-shot’ goals If patients are going to pursue ‘long-shot’ or experimental therapy, perhaps even against the recommendation of the treating team, it is useful to ensure the following:Reinforce the team’s respect for the decision, and desire to make sure the treatment has the best possible chance of working.Simultaneously try to maximize quality of lifein the present , including the best possible pain and symptom management and support.Encourage the patient and family to prepare in case treatment is not successful and the patient dies sooner rather than later. Useful language is to say,I’d encourage us all to hope for the best, but prepare for the worst .Reinforce that the team will not abandon the patient and family even if the decision is not what is being recommended.Close the meeting Following this discussion, restate your understanding of the patient’s goals and agreed-upon next steps to meet those goals, invite and answer questions, and close the meeting.Discussion & documentation Discuss the goals with key staff not in attendance (e.g. consulting physicians, patient’s nurse, discharge planner, primary care provider). Document the goals, preferably using a templated family meeting note (see Reference 1): who was present, what was discussed (e.g. treatment options, prognosis), what was decided, next steps.Debriefing A useful step after every family meeting is to debrief the process – what went well, what could have been improved and, most importantly, addressing the emotional reaction and needs of the care team.ReferencesClinical Tools. Center to Advance Palliative Care. Available at:http://www.capc.org/tools-for-palliative-care-programs/clinical-tools/ . Accessed August 4, 2009. Free registration required.Back A, Arnold R, Tulsky J.Mastering communication with seriously ill patients: balancing honesty with empathy and hope. New York, NY: Cambridge University Press; 2009. Author Affiliations: Medical College of Wisconsin, Milwaukee, WI (DEW); University of Rochester Medical Center, Rochester, NY (TEQ); University of Pittsburgh School of Medicine, UPMC Health System, Pittsburgh, PA (RMA).
#228 TapentadolAuthors: Rohtesh S Mehta MD, MPH and Robert M Arnold MDBackground Tapentadol is a newly available oral analgesic, approved by the FDA in 2009 for the management of moderate to severe acute pain in adults. ThisFast Fact reviews its pharmacology and use.PharmacologyTapentadol is a centrally-acting, synthetic, oral mu-opioid receptor agonist which also inhibits norepinephrine and serotonin reuptake within the CNS. It is structurally and pharmacologically similar to tramadol.Oral bioavailability ranges from 32% to 42%, with a half-life of 4 ½ hours.The drug is metabolized in the liver (97% by Phase-2 conjugation) and excreted in the urine.Tapentadol has no known pharmacologically active metabolites, no relevant CYP interactions, and no drug-drug interactions through cytochrome induction or inhibition(1) .There are no dosing adjustments required in mild-to-moderate renal or hepatic failure; it has not been studied in patients with severe impairments.Research Data The FDA approval was based on two industry-coordinated, randomized controlled studies conducted in patients with osteoarthritis and after bunionectomy. In these studies 50 mg doses of tapentadol was shown to be non-inferior to 10 mg of oxycodone immediate-release in the treatment of pain, but the incidence of nausea, vomiting, dizziness, and constipation was significantly lower(2,3) . In another single-dose study involving patients undergoing molar extraction, tapentadol 200 mg demonstrated improved analgesia but higher sedation than 60 mg of oral morphine(4).Total daily doses greater than 700 mg on the first day of therapy and 600 mg on subsequent days have not been tested, nor has tapentadol been studied in children. Tapentadol has not been tested in cancer pain or in palliative care settings. There are not enough data to comment on whether the drug has a ceiling effect, or on its long-term safety and efficacy (the longest study was only 90 days). Finally, it has not been comparatively studied against tramadol.Side Effects and Cautions Tapentadol’s side effect profile is generally similar to opioids’ (although with milder GI side effects): nausea, vomiting, constipation, respiratory depression, pruritus, dizziness and drowsiness. As with tramadol, there is a theoretical increased risk of seizures, as well as serotonin syndrome if given with other serotonergic agents (e.g. antidepressants, drugs with monamine oxidase inhibitory effects). Abuse and addiction are possible as with any opioid agonist. An abstinence syndrome has not yet been described; in one study drug tapering was not required after 90 days of treatment(2). Dosing and Cost Tapentadol is available as 50, 75 and 100 mg immediate-release tablets. The initial dose is 50-100 mg every 4 hours (although a second dose can be given one hour after the initial dose). The average wholesale pricing for tapentadol is approximately $2 per 50 mg tab, $2.40 per 75 mg tab, and $3.20 per 100 mg tab. For comparison, tramadol costs $0.07/tab (50 mg), oxycodone costs $0.70 (15 mg tab), and morphine costs $0.18 (15 mg tab).Summary Tapentadol is a novel analgesic, with a 50 mg dose similar in efficacy to 10 mg of oxycodone. Currently its only clearly defined benefit over established opioids is its gentler GI side effect profile. Its cost, potential ceiling effect, safety concerns with drug interactions, and uncertainty about long-term efficacy and safety limit its current application otherwise, particularly in patients with chronic cancer pain.ReferencesKneip C, Terlinden R, Beier H, Chen G. Investigations into the drug-drug interaction potential of tapentadol in human liver microsomes and fresh human hepatocytes.Drug Metab Lett. 2008; 2(1):67-75. PMID: 19356073.Hale M, Upmalis D, Okamoto A, Lange C, Rauschkolb C. Tolerability of tapentadol immediate release in patients with lower back pain or osteoarthritis of the hip or knee over 90 days: a randomized, double-blind study.Curr Med Res Opin . 2009; 25(5):1095-104. PMID: 19301989.Daniels S, Casson E, Stegmann JU, Oh C, Okamoto A, Rauschkolb C, Upmalis D. A randomized, double-blind, placebo-controlled phase 3 study of the relative efficacy and tolerability of tapentadol IR and oxycodone IR for acute pain.Curr Med Res Opin . 2009; 25(6):1551-61. PMID: 19445652.Kleinert R, Lange C, Steup A, Black P, Goldberg J, Desjardins P. Single dose analgesic efficacy of tapentadol in postsurgical dental pain: the results of a randomized, double-blind, placebo-controlled study.Anesth Analg . 2008; 107(6):2048-55. PMID: 19020157.Author Affiliations: University of Pittsburgh Medical Center, Pittsburgh, PA.ACGME Competencies: patient care; medical knowledgeKeywords: Pain - Opioids
#229 Seizure Management in the Dying PatientAuthors: Jennifer Connelly MD and David E Weissman MDBackground Management of seizures in the dying patient without intravenous access, such as is in the home environment, is challenging. Seizures in this population can be due to primary or metastatic brain cancers, strokes, toxic/metabolic causes including hypoglycemia, or pre-existing seizure disorders. The actual incidence of seizures in dying patients is unknown, and while likely uncommon, they can cause tremendous distress to patients and families. ThisFast Fact reviews management strategies for seizures near the end of life.Seizure Prophylaxis Up to 40% of patients with brain tumors have a seizure at the time of diagnosis and another 20% develop seizures during the course of the illness. Although antiepileptic drugs (AEDs) are commonly started as prophylaxis at the time of brain tumor diagnosis, they have not been found to prevent seizures and the American Academy of Neurology Clinical Practice Guidelines do not support this practice (1). Thus, prophylactic AEDs can be safely discontinued in patients with brain tumors who have never had a seizure. For patients with a seizure history, including those with brain tumors, AEDs should be continued as long as possible. For patients who lose an enteric route and have no intravenous access, rectal administration of prophylactic AEDs is possible. Clinical judgment should be used as to whether to continue AEDs in this setting; it can be appropriate to simply stop them, particularly if the patient’s prognosis is very short. Phenobarbital, pentobarbital, carbamazepine, valproic acid, and lamotrigine can all be given rectally. Rectal absorption of other prophylactic AEDs is undefined and they should not be administered. None of the aforementioned AEDs need dose adjustments for rectal administration. Carbamazepine should be divided into small doses administered 6-8 times a day. Lamotrigone is administered rectally by crushing and suspending the chewable tablets in 10 mL of water. When clinically indicated, drug levels of lamotrigine should be monitored as rectal absorption is erratic.Seizure ManagementSingle self-limited seizure: Check for treatable causes such as hypoglycemia. If no reversible cause is identified, initiation of maintenance AED therapy should be considered, particularly if the patient is expected to survive more than a few weeks.Acute seizure or status epilepticus:Non-intravenous routes: Rectal diazepam (0.2 mg/kg or 10-20mg) is the drug of choice for status epilepticus and acute seizures lasting greater than two minutes due to its bioavailability, ease of administration, and short time to peak serum concentration ( < 20 minutes). Diazepam can be repeated hourly until the seizure stops. Some authors suggest continuing 20 mg per rectum nightly to reduce the occurrence of further seizure events. Other rectal benzodiazepines are available (clonazepam, lorazepam, and midazolam), but take longer to reach peak serum levels. Sublingual lorazepam and intranasal midazolam are also available, but their use in the adult population is not well-studied.Parenteral therapy: When available, intravenous and subcutaneous benzodiazepines can be used and are usually effective at stopping a seizure in progress; intravenous lorazepam is preferred due to its long half-life. Clonazepam and midazolam can be given subcutaneously at doses similar to the intravenous route. If seizure activity persists, additional anti-epileptic medication should be provided using a loading and then maintenance dose. Patients with refractory seizures who have short prognoses and comfort-oriented goals of care should be considered for an anti-epileptic sedative such as midazolam or a barbiturate with the goal of deep sedation (seeFast Facts #106 and107 ). Parenteral AED Dosing and Routes.DrugStatus loading doseMaintenance dose Diazepam 0.2 mg/kg or 10-20 mg PR 20 mg PR nightly Lorazepam 0.1 mg/kg IV or IM Midazolam 0.1-0.3 mg/kg IV or SC Titrate to control refractory seizures if needed Clonazepam 1 mg IV or SC Phenytoin 20 mg/kg IV 4-5 mg/kg/day IV divided TID Fosphenytoin 20 mg/kg IV or IM 4-5 mg/kg/day IV or IM divided TID Phenobarbital 10-15 mg/kg 1-3 mg/kg/day IV or IM 1200 mg/day SC (2)Family Education Family members should be counseled that all medications used to manage seizures can cause sedation and cardiopulmonary depression. Family members who have witnessed prior seizures often have great fear about seizure recurrence. Many hospice agencies have established seizure protocols and medication kits which can be stored at home, and will collaborate with physicians and families on establishing a ‘seizure plan’ for acute seizures. It is important to review with the family seizure safety, including not putting anything in the patient’s mouth and making sure the patient is in a safe environment.ReferencesGlantz MJ, Cole BF, Forsyth PA, et al. Practice parameter: anticonvulsant prophylaxis in patients with newly diagnosed brain tumors: report of the Quality Standards Subcommittee of the American Academy of Neurology.Neurol . 2000; 54:1886-1893.Krouwer H, Pallagi J, Graves N. Management of seizures in brain tumor patients at the end of life.J Palliat Med . 2000;3:465-475.Davis M, Walsh D, LeGrand S, et al. Symptom control in cancer patients: the clinical pharmacolog and therapeutic role of suppositories and rectal suspensions.Support Care Cancer. 2002; 10:117-138.Brown L, Bergen DC, Kotagal P, et al. Safety of Diastat when given at larger-than-recommended doses for acute repetitive seizures.Neurol . 2001; 56:1112.Voltz R, Borasio GD. Palliative therapy in the terminal stage of neurological disease.J Neurol . 1997; 244[Suppl 4]:S2-S10.Droney J, Hall E. Status epilepticus in a hospice inpatient setting.J Pain Symptom Manage . 2008; 36:97-105.Author Affiliations: Medical College of Wisconsin, Milwaukee, WI.Fast Facts and Conceptsare edited by Drew A. Rosielle MD, Palliative Care Center, Medical College of Wisconsin. For more information write to:drosielle@gmail.com . More information, as well as the complete set ofFast Facts , are available at EPERC:http://www.mcw.edu/eperc . Readers can comment on this publication at theFast Facts and Concepts Discussion Blog (http://epercfastfacts.blogspot.com ).Copyright/Referencing Information : Users are free to download and distributeFast Facts for educational purposes only. Connelly J, Weissman DE. Seizure Management in the Dying Patient.Fast Facts and Concepts . April 2010; 229. Available at:http://www.eperc.mcw.edu/EPERC/FastFactsIndex/ff_229.htm .Disclaimer:Fast Facts and Concepts provide educational information. This information is not medical advice. Health care providers should exercise their own independent clinical judgment. SomeFast Facts cite the use of a product in a dosage, for an indication, or in a manner other than that recommended in the product labeling. Accordingly, the official prescribing information should be consulted before any such product is used.Parenteral AED Dosing and Routes.DrugStatus loading doseMaintenance dose Diazepam 0.2 mg/kg or 10-20 mg PR 20 mg PR nightly Lorazepam 0.1 mg/kg IV or IM Midazolam 0.1-0.3 mg/kg IV or SC Titrate to control refractory seizures if needed Clonazepam 1 mg IV or SC Phenytoin 20 mg/kg IV 4-5 mg/kg/day IV divided TID Fosphenytoin 20 mg/kg IV or IM 4-5 mg/kg/day IV or IM divided TID Phenobarbital 10-15 mg/kg 1-3 mg/kg/day IV or IM 1200 mg/day SC (2) Family Education Family members should be counseled that all medications used to manage seizures can cause sedation and cardiopulmonary depression. Family members who have witnessed prior seizures often have great fear about seizure recurrence. Many hospice agencies have established seizure protocols and medication kits which can be stored at home, and will collaborate with physicians and families on establishing a ‘seizure plan’ for acute seizures.It is important to review with the family seizure safety, including not putting anything in the patient’s mouth and making sure the patient is in a safe environment.ReferencesGlantz MJ, Cole BF, Forsyth PA, et al. Practice parameter: anticonvulsant prophylaxis in patients with newly diagnosed brain tumors: report of the Quality Standards Subcommittee of the American Academy of Neurology.Neurol . 2000; 54:1886-1893.Krouwer H, Pallagi J, Graves N. Management of seizures in brain tumor patients at the end of life.J Palliat Med . 2000;3:465-475.Davis M, Walsh D, LeGrand S, et al. Symptom control in cancer patients: the clinical pharmacolog and therapeutic role of suppositories and rectal suspensions.Support Care Cancer. 2002; 10:117-138.Brown L, Bergen DC, Kotagal P, et al. Safety of Diastat when given at larger-than-recommended doses for acute repetitive seizures.Neurol . 2001; 56:1112.Voltz R, Borasio GD. Palliative therapy in the terminal stage of neurological disease.J Neurol . 1997; 244[Suppl 4]:S2-S10.Droney J, Hall E. Status epilepticus in a hospice inpatient setting.J Pain Symptom Manage . 2008; 36:97-105.Author Affiliations: Medical College of Wisconsin, Milwaukee, WI.
#230 Using Non-Invasive Ventilation at the End of LifeAuthors: Mei-Ean Yeow MD, Rohtesh S Mehta MD MPH, Douglas B White MD, MAS, and Eytan Szmuilowicz MDBackground Non-invasive positive pressure ventilation (NPPV, often called 'BiPAP') is commonly used in patients with respiratory failure from COPD, CHF, and other disorders. NPPV decreases the work of breathing and allows respiratory muscle rest during inspiration. ThisFast Fact discusses medical decision making around its use at the end of life.Fast Fact #231 discusses practical aspects of applying NPPV in dying patients, as well as how to discontinue it safely.Goals of NPPV at the end of life NPPV is used in 3 general circumstances in patients close to death, all of which are likely to be encountered by palliative specialists (1):In patients who desire full, life-prolonging interventions, regardless of prognosis. If the patient's respiratory status deteriorates, intubation and ventilation are initiated.In patients who want life-prolonging and restorative therapy but with limitations (e.g., patients who have a 'Do Not Intubate' order but otherwise want all attempts at life prolongation). Ideally, NPPV is used only if the etiology for the respiratory failure is thought to be reversible and is stopped if it is not producing the desired response or the patient is not tolerating NPPV. In practice, this may not be the case.In dying patients with respiratory failure or dyspnea for palliative purposes. This category includes dying patients who have decided to forego life-prolonging therapies and wish to focus on comfort measures. NPPV can be used with the intention to reduce the work of breathing, to ease dyspnea, and to help maintain wakefulness by reducing the amount of opioids a patient needs to be comfortable. NPPV can also be used to prolong life for a short period to meet a patient's goals while otherwise providing a comfortable death (e.g., to allow time for family to visit). Unlike #2, the goal is not to bridge a patient through a reversible illness, but to forestall death to meet a specific goal.Research FindingsIn several trials NPPV has been shown to reduce mortality and decrease intubation rates and hospital length of stay in patients with COPD, as well as reduce intubation rates in patients with respiratory failure from heart failure and in immunocompromised patients (2-4). For the second category of patients, there are no high-quality trials. Some observational studies suggest that NPPV can reverse acute respiratory failure and decrease hospital mortality in patients with COPD or CHF who have 'Do Not Intubate' orders (5,6). Apart from ALS (see Fast Fact #73 ) there are no data to support its use in other patient populations.There is little research about the use of NPPV to alleviate dyspnea in dying patients, whether it is opioid-sparing, or how tolerable it is to dying patients. In a survey, a majority of pulmonologists endorsed a belief that NPPV relieves dyspnea in dying patients in addition to anxiolytics and analgesics (7). That clinical impression has never been investigated. In a controlled study of hospitalized end-stage cancer patients with severe respiratory failure, NPPV was shown to improve dyspnea much faster than passive oxygen therapy (8). However, 57% of patients were discharged alive in this study, underlying the reality that NPPV's role in imminently dying patients has not been rigorously investigated.Drawbacks of NPPV NPPV is noisy, can be uncomfortable and frightening, can interfere with family intimacy, and can confuse care goals if not discussed carefully. It can be challenging or impossible to initiate outside of acute care environments (e.g. at home, nursing home, or hospice facility) - (seeFast Fact #231).Medical Decision Making and Counseling Patients in categories #1 & 2, as with all patients nearing the end of life, need ongoing discussions about their realistic prognosis, goals, and options (seeFast Facts #164 ,165 ,222-7 ).For dying patients with distressing dyspnea and comfort-only goals of care, opioids are first line agents (seeFast Fact #27). For patients who need sedating doses of opioids to be comfortable, and who articulate a strong preference to be as awake as possible, it is reasonable to offer NPPV if the patient is in an environment which can accommodate it and the risks are acceptable to the patient,including the possibility that the dying process will be prolonged. Reassure patients that you can alleviate their symptoms even if NPPV is unhelpful or intolerable.For dying patients who wish to forestall death briefly for a specific goal, it is reasonable to start a trial of NPPV. Before initiating NPPV, it is important to discuss withdrawal of NPPV after the above goal has been achieved, and to caution the patient/family that NPPV might not be able to forestall death long enough as hoped.ReferencesCurtis JR, Cook DJ, Sinuff T, et al; Society of Critical Care Medicine Palliative Noninvasive Positive VentilationTask Force. Noninvasive positive pressure ventilation in critical and palliative care settings: understanding the goals of therapy.Crit Care Med . 2007; 35(3):932-9.Peter JV, Moran JL. Noninvasive ventilation in exacerbations of chronic obstructive pulmonary disease: implications of different meta-analytic strategies.Ann Intern Med . 2004; 141(5):W78-9.Keenan SP, Sinuff T, Cook DJ, Hill NS. Does noninvasive positive pressure ventilation improve outcome in acute hypoxemic respiratory failure? A systematic review.Crit Care Med . 2004; 32(12):2516-23.Rusterholtz T, Kempf J, Berton C, et al. Noninvasive pressure support ventilation (NIPSV) with face mask in patients with acute cardiogenic pulmonary edema (ACPE).Intensive Care Med . 1999; 25(1):21-8.Schettino G, Altobelli N, Kacmarek RM. Noninvasive positive pressure ventilation reverses acute respiratory failure in select 'do-not-intubate' patients.Crit Care Med . 2005; 33(9):1976-82.Levy M, Tanios MA, Nelson D, et al. Outcomes of patients with do-not-intubate orders treated with noninvasive ventilation.Crit Care Med . 2004; 32(10):2002-7.Sinuff T, Cook DJ, Keenan SP, et al. Noninvasive ventilation for acute respiratory failure near the end of life.Crit Care Med . 2008; 36(3):789-94.Nava S, et al. Multicenter, randomized study of the use of non-invasive ventilation (NIV) vs oxygen therapy (O2) in reducing respiratory distress in end-stage cancer patients (Abstract).Am J Respir Crit Care Med . 2008; 177:A767.Author Affiliations: Northwestern Memorial Hospital, Chicago, IL (MEY, ES); University of Pittsburgh Medical Center, Pittsburgh, PA (RSM, DBW).
#231 Practical Aspects of Using NPPV at the End of LifeAuthors: Mei-Ean Yeow MD and Eytan Szmuilowicz MDBackground Non-Invasive Positive Pressure Ventilation (NPPV) can be used to palliate dyspnea in dying patients.Fast Fact#230 discusses medical decision making around using NPPV. ThisFast Fact discusses practical aspects of using NPPV in dying patients. Little research has occurred on this topic; unless otherwise indicated the following discussion is empiric and based on clinician opinion and common practice.Location The cost and experience needed to initiate NPPV limit its use to the hospital setting, with some exceptions (see below). Most NPPV use occurs in ICUs or transitional care (‘step-down’) units, and at some institutions continuous NPPV is not allowed outside of these settings. While the use of NPPV for palliation can occur at home or a hospice facility, it requires adequate nursing, respiratory therapy, and physician support to employ it safely. This can be a practical barrier to its use, and NPPV should not be offered unless one is sure it can be provided appropriately. Ensuring adequate respiratory therapist support is particularly crucial, as they have unique expertise at initiating and trouble-shooting the machines.Continuing NPPV for palliation in patients and families who are already comfortable managing home NPPV (e.g. for COPD or ALS) can be practical in the home or hospice facility setting, as long as it is consistent with care goals.Initiating NPPV in the home setting for dying patients is impractical and, given how uncertain its real benefits are (seeFast Fact#230 ), is not advised.Starting NPPVMasks : While full facemasks are commonly used in the in-patient setting, some patients find these claustrophobic. Nasal masks tend to be better-tolerated, but they do not work as well in patients who are mouth breathers. Patient preference and clinician familiarity should guide this decision.Settings : Two parameters need to be set: the inspiratory positive airway pressure (IPAP) and end-expiratory positive pressure (EPAP). The breaths are usually triggered by the patient. On many devices it is possible to set a back-up rate if the patient does not trigger a breath spontaneously– this is inappropriate in dying patients receiving NPPV for symptom relief.Strategies : There are two general approaches to initiating NPPV settings: a ‘high to low’ approach and a ‘low to high’ approach, referring to the initial IPAP settings. The EPAP is usually set at 3-5 cmH2O. In order to maximize the tolerability of NPPV for symptom relief in dying patients, a ‘low-high’ approach is recommended. Start with a lower IPAP (8-10 cmH2O), and gradually increase as tolerated to achieve alleviation of dyspnea, decreased respiratory rate, increased tidal volume, and patient-machine synchrony.Monitoring Monitoring of pulse oximetry and arterial blood gases are not needed for patients using NPPV only for symptom control. Rather, the effect of NPPV should be assessed based on subjective improvement of dyspnea and decrease in respiratory rate. It is important to reassess patients frequently (looking specifically for respiratory rate, use of accessory muscles, and signs of anxiety), and to ask them if they are comfortable with the NPPV and deriving any benefit from it. Breaks from NPPV to eat, drink, and more freely communicate should be encouraged as much as patients desire.Contraindications Contraindications are facial surgery/trauma/deformities that limit placement of the NPPV mask and patients with active nausea and vomiting. Decreased mental status is also considered a contraindication it increases the risk of aspiration from NPPV.Discontinuing NPPV NPPV should be discontinued if it does not provide relief from dyspnea within an hour of the maximally tolerated setting, once a patient is no longer alert, or at any point when it is no longer meeting a patient’s goals. If the patient does not tolerate the mask, or feels claustrophobic, a small dose of a benzodiazepine can be administered to alleviate anxiety. If the patient is still uncomfortable, then NPPV should be stopped as it is then not adding to patient comfort. Opioids and benzodiazepines should be used to decrease dyspnea once NPPV is stopped. Remember that NPPV provides ventilatory support to patients and the work of breathing can dramatically increase without it. Be prepared to rapidly control any distressing symptoms,just as you would with discontinuing invasive mechanical ventilation (seeFast Facts#27 ,33 and34 ).ReferencesNava S, et al. Multicenter, randomized study of the use of non-invasive ventilation (NIV) vs oxygen therapy (O2) in reducing respiratory distress in end-stage cancer patients.Am J Respir Crit Care Med . 2008; 177:A767.Yeow M, Santanilla J. Non-invasive positive pressure ventilation in the emergency room.Emerg Med Clin N Am. 2008; 26:835-847.Author Affiliations: Northwestern Memorial Hospital, Chicago, IL
#232 Family Presence During ResuscitationAuthors: Ciarán Bradley MD, MA, Melech Lensky BCC, JD, and Karen Brasel MD, MPHBackground Cardiopulmonary resuscitations are abrupt and traumatic clinical events that frequently result in a patient’s death or permanent change in health status(Fast Fact #179 ) . Not only can the time period of the resuscitation be the only chance family members have to see a patient before death, but families are sometimes called upon to make end-of-life or other critical medical decisions during this highly emotional event. Allowing family presence during resuscitation (FPDR) has been proposed as a way to better support the emotional needs of family members and facilitate improved decision-making. ThisFast Fact discusses the potential benefits and pitfalls of FPDR.Fast Fact #233 discusses key elements of an institutional policy to effectively implement and maximize the benefits of FPDR.Description of FPDR FPDR is defined as ‘the presence of family in the patient care area, in a location that affords visual or physical contact with the patient during…resuscitation events’. (1). FPDR involves the selective, monitored admission of one or two family members into the care area while their loved one is undergoing resuscitation. Trained facilitators screen the family members prior to their entrance into the care area, provide constant supervision and emotional support for the family members while observing the resuscitation, and arrange grief counseling or continued spiritual support after the conclusion of the resuscitation. Venues where FPDR can occur include the emergency department or trauma resuscitation room, intensive care units, pre-and post-procedure recovery areas, and inpatient units.History Historically, many practitioners thought that FPDR was inappropriate and injurious to families, as well as bothersome or dangerously distracting to clinicians. It was seldom practiced, and only on an ad hoc basis. Recently, however, many institutions have developed formal policies and protocols to support the practice, and FPDR has been the subject of intense research. Based on this research, multiple professional societies have endorsed FPDR (2-6), and FPDR has gradually become more accepted by clinicians. The majority of critical care nurses support FPDR (7), and after real-life exposure to an FPDR protocol, 79% of attending physicians supported it as well (8). Resident physicians, however, tend to be the most uncomfortable with FPDR, often feeling watched and evaluated by family members (8).Potential Benefits of FPDRPatients: For patients with some awareness of their surroundings (such as when a patient awakens shortly after a successful resuscitation), FPDR can provide comfort through the presence of loved ones (9).Families: FPDR can help families understand the gravity of their loved one’s condition and recognize that the medical staff is doing everything possible. (8). It may be that witnessing the trauma of unsuccessful resuscitative efforts can facilitate surrogate decision-makers’ comfort with suspending further resuscitation attempts. FPDR can also promote closure and assist with grieving for family members after unsuccessful resuscitations (8).Medical Team: FPDR provides an opportunity to educate family members about the patient’s condition, while family members help practitioners by providing information or acting as spokespersons. FPDR also reminds clinicians of the patient’s personhood, and is thought to encourage more professional behavior at the bedside (8,9).Concerns Associated with FPDRTraumatized Families: Some practitioners believe that trauma to families can be worsened by watching invasive procedures performed on their loved ones. Evidence shows, however, that family members who are present experience neither prolonged distress nor greater anxiety than those in matched control groups. Furthermore, they may experience fewer symptoms associated with a complicated grief response. In one prospective trial, 100% of family members who had agreed to participate in FPDR said they would do so again if given the opportunity (8).Increased Litigation: Concerns persist that FPDR will increase malpractice litigation. These concerns are contradicted by the mounting evidence demonstrating that improved patient and family communication decreases lawsuits/ Additionally, hospitals with longstanding FPDR policies have not reported increased litigation (12).Hampered Medical Team: Some clinicians worry that FPDR can distract the medical team from the task at hand or lead clinicians to themselves. One study showed the detrimental effect of FPDR on trainee physicians performance in a simulated setting, particularly with 'disrurptive families'(13). However, there are no data from real-life situations to support that FPDR worsens the quality of resuscitative efforts, and many institutions specifically have addressed these concerns in their FPDR protocols (seeFast Fact #233).ReferencesClark AP, Aldridge MD, Guzzetta CE, et al. Family presence during cardiopulmonary resuscitation.Crit Care Nurse Clin N Am. 2005; 17:23-32.Emergency Nurses Association. Position Statement: Family presence at the bedside during invasive procedures and cardiopulmonary resuscitation. Revised 2005. Available at:http://www.ena.org/SiteCollectionDocuments/Position%20Statements/Family_Presence_-_ENA_PS.htm . Accessed Oct 16, 2009.American Association of Critical-Care Nurses. Practice Alert: Family presence during CPR and invasive procedures. 2004. Available atwww.aacn.org/wd/practice/docs/family_presence_during_CPR_11-2004.htm . Accessed Oct 16, 2009.Walsh K. End of Life Care Practice Update: Family presence in resuscitative and treatment procedures. National Association of Social Workers. 2004. Available atwww.socialworkers.org/practice/behavioral_health/mbh0904.htm . Accessed Oct 16, 2009.Cummins RO, Hasinski MF. The most important changes in the international ECC and CPR guidelines 2000. Circulation. 2000; 102:I371-I376. American Academy of Pediatrics Committee on Hospital Care. Family-centered care and the pediatrician’s role. Pediatrics. 2003; 112:691-696.Maclean SL, Guzetta CE, White C, et al. Family presence during cardiopulmonary resuscitation and invasive procedures: Practice of critical care and emergency nurses. Am J Crit Care. 2003; 12:246-257.Meyers TA, Eichhorn DJ, Guzzetta CE, at al. Family presence during invasive procedures and resuscitation: the experiences of family members, nurses, and physicians. Am J Nurs. 2000; 100:32-42.Eichhorn DJ, Meyers TA, Guzetta CE, et al. Family presence during invasive procedures and resuscitation: hearing the voice of the patient. Am J Nurs. 2001; 101:26-33.Robnison SM, Mackenzie-Ross S, Campbell Hewson GK, et al. Psychological effect of witnessed resuscitation on bereaved relatives. Lancet. 1998; 352:614-617.SS, Hamm G. Risk management: extreme honesty may be the best policy. Ann Intern Med. 1999; 131:963-967.Mason DJ. Family presence: Evidence versus tradition. Am J Crit Care. 2003; 12:190-192.Fernandez R, Compton S, Jones KA, et al. The presence of a family witness impacts physician performance during simulated medical codes. Crit Care Med. 2009; 37:1956-1960. ACGME Categories: Systems based practice, professionalismAuthor Affiliations: Medical College of Wisconsin, Milwaukee, WI (CB, KB); FroedtertHospital, Milwaukee, WI (ML).
#233 Implementation of a Family Presence During Resuscitation ProtocolAuthors: Ciarán Bradley MD, MA, Melech Lensky BCC, JD, and Karen Brasel MD, MPHBackgroundFast Fact#232 discusses the history, benefits, and potential risks of allowing family presence during cardiopulmonary resuscitation (FPDR). Successful implementation of FDPR in an institution is dependent on using a structured protocol to maximize family support and patient safety. ThisFast Fact discusses the key components of a successful FPDR policy.Key Policy Components (adapted in part from Meyers, et al, 2000):Facilitator: Identify and train a core group of FPDR facilitators to respond to calls for FPDR. Facilitators should be trained to assess families, understand the functioning of the medical team, understand the facilitator’s role in bringing the family to the medical theater, and provide post-resuscitation support. Potential facilitators can include social workers, chaplains, child life specialists, nurses and allied health professionals. The facilitator’s specialty is less important than ensuring adequate training.Chaplains and social workers can be ideal for this task, however, as they may have more flexibility to respond, and are unlikely to step away from the family and become involved in the resuscitation. Ideally, facilitators would respond to all resuscitation events in an institution to assess the appropriateness and need for family presence.Assessment: Assess whether FPDR is appropriate in a given situation. First, the medical team must agree to FPDR. Second, the patient, if able, must provide his or her consent. Third, the FPDR facilitator should assess whether the family members are suitable candidates for FPDR. He or she should not offer it to individuals who are histrionic, combative, or overly disruptive. If the facilitator believes that the family members are suitable candidates for FPDR, then he or she should offer the opportunity to be present in the resuscitation area. Finally, staff should support family members in a decision not to witness resuscitation, and ensure that their emotional and informational needs are being met even if they are not at the bedside.Number of Visitors: Limit the number of family members brought to the medical theater to one or two. Greater numbers of visitors will be difficult to accommodate, given the constraints of the care area, and will stretch the facilitator’s ability to maintain control of the visitors, offer emotional support, and answer questions. If a legal decision-maker for the patient has been identified, it can be beneficial to preferentially offer FPDR to that person, since he or she may be called upon to participate in real-time decisions during or immediately following the resuscitation.Preparing the Family: The facilitator should prepare the family members by providing ‘ground rules’ for their presence such as where they will stand, how long to remain, how to ask questions, and cautions about disrupting medical personnel providing patient care. Family members should be oriented to what to expect such as the patient’s appearance, invasive procedures and the presence of blood, and presence of multiple, active health care professionals.Facilitator’s Role in the Care Area: The FPDR facilitator must remain by the side of the family members. He or she should offer comfort and support, explain interventions and terminology when appropriate, and assist with grieving, while always being prepared to usher the family out of the care area should they become emotionally overwhelmed or distracting to the medical team. Facilitators with medical backgrounds should resist any temptation to participate in the procedures, assist caregivers, or critique what is occurring. Given the physical constraints of the resuscitation area and provided that the medical team is not disrupted, family members may be allowed to approach the bedside and offer physical comfort to their loved one.Surrogate Decision-Making: Family members present during an unsuccessful resuscitation might be asked to make decisions about continuing resuscitative efforts, or initiate such a request themselves. If the legal decision-maker is present (e.g., the patient’s health care power of attorney or other designee as recognized by state law or institutional policy) it is appropriate for the medical team to follow an informed decision by the surrogate. If no legal decision-maker is available or clearly identifiable, the physician directing the resuscitation should make her or his own decision about the appropriateness of continuing resuscitation efforts based on an assessment of the likelihood of success, and any available guidance provided by loved ones present. Some institutions have specific policies guiding these decisions.Post-Event Family Support: Families may need continued support and the opportunity to debrief afterwards. If the patient dies, families should be allowed as liberal access as possible to their loved one’s body, and staff should refer families to a hospital or outside bereavement program.Post-Event Staff Support: Medical team members may need to debrief after a particularly troubling or emotional FPDR event. The institution’s FDPR policy should identify the parties responsible for arranging a debriefing. Individuals at teaching institutions should be aware of the unique challenges FPDR can put on housestaff in their dual role as providers and learners.ReferencesMeyers TA, Eichhorn DJ, Guzzetta CE, at al. Family presence during invasive procedures and resuscitation: the experiences of family members, nurses, and physicians.Am J Nurs . 2000; 100:32-42.Fernandez R, Compton S, Jones KA, et al. The presence of a family witness impacts physician performance during simulated medical codes.Crit Care Med . 2009; 37:1956-1960.Author Affiliations: Medical College of Wisconsin, Milwaukee, WI (CB, KB); Froedtert Hospital, Milwaukee, WI (ML).ACGME Competencies: Systems based practice, CommunicationKeywords: Ethics, Law, Health Systems & P ICU
#234 Prognosis of Anoxic-Ischemic EncephalopathyAuthor: James Fausto, MDIntroduction Cardiac arrest, experienced by approximately 450,000 Americans annually, has a very poor survival rate (seeFast Fact #179 ). Some patients who initially survive cardiopulmonary resuscitation remain comatose, demonstrating obvious impairments in consciousness and neurologic function. This syndrome, called anoxic-ischemic encephalopathy (AIE, also known as ‘anoxic brain injury,’ or ‘hypoxic-ischemic coma’), can result in outcomes ranging from full recovery to permanent unconsciousness to death. ThisFast Fact discusses prognostic factors in adults with AIE after cardiac arrest.“Neurologic Outcome” A challenge in interpreting the literature on AIE is the use of variable or imprecise definitions of a ‘poor neurologic outcome.’ The American Academy of Neurology practice parameter paper defines poor outcome as: death, persistent unconsciousness (such as a vegetative state), or severe disability requiring full nursing care after 6 months (6). This is the definition used in thisFast Fact .Predictors of Neurologic Outcome A review of the current literature reveals that data obtained by careful neurologic exam, electrophysiologic studies, and biochemical markers are most predictive of outcome (see below). Other factors not strongly predictive of outcome include: age, sex, cause of arrest, type of arrhythmia, total arrest time, duration of CPR, geographic location of arrest, elevated body temperature, elevated intracranial pressure, concurrent respiratory failure, and brain imaging findings (3,6,7,8).Note: the data below assume patients are not receiving medications which would significantly confound their neurologic examination such as high-dose barbiturates. In all cases, specialist neurologic examination and input is advised.Strong Indicators of Poor Outcome (false positive rates of 0% based on current literature):Absent pupillary light reflexes 24 hours after CPR, or 72 hours after CPR for those who initially had intact papillary light reflexes (3,6,7).Absent corneal reflexes 72 hours post-CPR (6,7).Short-latency Somatosensory Evoked Potentials (SSEP, an electrophysiologic study): bilateral absence of the N20 potentials on SSEP of the median nerve in AIE patients greater than 24 hours post-CPR (1,6,7,8).Neuron-Specific Enolase (NSE, a blood test): serum NSE > 33 mcg/L on day 1 to 3 (6,7,8). While this biomarker is promising, it has not been studied in large trials, nor is the assay itself standardized, so its current clinical role remains undefined (7).Moderate Predictors of Poor Outcomes (these all predict a poor outcome, but not as invariably as the above factors based on current literature):Clinical exam findings : no spontaneous eye movements or absent oculocephalic reflexes at 72 hours post-arrest (3,6,7). No, or extensor-only, motor response to painful stimuli at 72 hours also implies a very poor chance of recovery (3,6).Electroencephalogram findings : certain findings can be strongly associated with poor outcomes but are highly subject to institutional/technician variability. Myoclonic status epilepticus within 1 day of cardiac arrest is the most predictive of a poor outcome (3,6,7,8).The Therapeutic Hypothermia Protocol The majority of the evidence for prognosis in the comatose patient after CPR predates the widespread use of therapeutic hypothermia in patients after cardiac arrest. It remains unclear how this intervention will change prognostication. While the above factors will likely still indicate poor prognosis, the timing of when the evaluations should be done, as well as if they will predict auniformly poor outcome is uncertain. One European study advises that patients have an initial neurological assessment as soon as possible, but that the second assessment occursno earlier than 48-72 hours after resumption of normothermia (2). Zandbergen et al suggest that serum NSE >33 mcg/L occurring while hypothermic still consistently predicts poor outcomes accurately (8). Initial data (4,8) on the predictive value of SSEPs in patients who underwent hypothermia confirmed that bilateral absent N20 responses is highly predictive of a poor outcome. There has been a case report of a single patient with absent N20 responses who made a full recovery, highlighting the importance of ongoing investigation into the impact of the hypothermia protocol on the prognosis of AIE (4).ReferencesBleck TP. Prognostication and management of patients who are comatose after arrest.Neurol. 2006; 67: 556-57.Friberg,H.. Neurological prognostication after cardiac arrest.Scand J Trauma Resuscitation Emerg Med . 2008; 16:10.Levy DE, Caronna JJ, Singer BH, Lapinski RH, Frydman H, Pulm F. Predicting outcome from hypoxic-ischemic coma.JAMA. 1985; 253:1420-6.Leithner C, Ploner CJ, Hasper D, Storm C. Does hypothermia influence the predictive value of bilateral absent N20 after cardiac arrest?Neurol . 2010; 74:965-969.Lloyd-Jones D, et al. Heart disease and stroke statistics 2010 update: a report from the American Heart Association.Circulation . 2010; 121:e46-e215.Wijdicks EFM, Hijdra A, Young GB, et al. Practice parameter: prediction of outcome in comatose survivors after cardiopulmonary resuscitation (an evidence based review): report of the Quality Standards Subcommittee of American Academy of Neurology.Neurol . 2006; 67:203-10.Young GB. Neurologic prognosis after cardiac arrest.NEJM . 2009: 361:607-11.Zandbergen EG, Hijdra A, Koelman JH, et al. Prediction of poor outcome within the first 3 days of postanoxic coma.Neurol. 2006; 66:62-8.Author Affiliation: Montefiore Medical Center, Albert Einstein College of Medicine, Bronx, NY.ACGME Competencies: Medical Knowledge, PBLIKeywords: Prognosis, Other Neurologic Disorders, ICU
#235 Prognostic Models in Critically Ill AdultsAuthors : René Claxton MD, Derek Angus MD, and Robert Arnold MDBackground Prognostication for ICU patients is challenging. Grieving families, trying to make informed decisions about their loved ones care, often ask What are the chances he or she will get through this? Several prognostic models have been developed to predict survival for groups of patients stratified by severity of illness. These are used in outcomes research to compare patient groups, assess and compare ICU performance and help guide resource allocation. Anecdotally, data from these models is sometimes used in discussing prognosis with family members of critically ill patients. This Fast Fact discusses common ICU prognostic models and their role in guiding patient care and communication.Widely used ICU prognostic models Common models for predicting mortality in medical-surgical ICU patients include the Acute Physiologic and Chronic Health Evaluation (APACHE) score, the Mortality Probability Model (MPM), the Simplified Acute Physiology Score (SAPS) and the Sequential Organ Failure Assessment (SOFA) score (1-4). The SOFA score can be calculated at the bedside based on laboratory and physiologic data; however, this model has not been widely used in either clinical or research practice by the critical care community to predict mortality. The APACHE, MPM, and SAPS models are more widely used and require computer software to calculate a score based on multiple variables including type of admission, the patient’s underlying diseases, physiologic data, and – in the case of APACHE – laboratory data. The APACHE score is based on the worst values available during ICU Day 1 whereas MPM and SAPS scores are calculated based on data obtained within one hour of ICU admission. The models require re-validation over time as ICU interventions and outcomes change. The APACHE score is currently in its fourth version. MPM and SAPS are in their third versions. Although APACHE IV and MPM III require proprietary software to calculate a score, the SAPS3 score can be computed using a downloadable calculator (5). Individual institutions may use a model for all ICU admissions for purposes of quality monitoring, outcome reporting, or research, and so some clinicians may have these scores readily available to them.Accuracy of the prognostic models The discrimination and calibration ability of ICU prognostic models determine their predictive accuracy (6). Discrimination is the ability of a model to predict a mortality rate similar to the observed rate; calibration reflects a model’s ability to predict an outcome at multiple levels (mortality rates). The most recent versions of APACHE, MPM, AND SOFA show both high discrimination and calibration. All three models report a score based on the above variables that correlates with a predicted in-hospital mortality rate. For example, a SAPS3 score of 73 correlates with a hospital mortality rate of 62%. The other two models work similarly.Clinical use of ICU prognostic models All of these models accurately predict rates of in-hospital mortality in a population of critically ill patients. This is different than predicting survival for an individual patient (7), let alone using them to guide individual treatment decisions. None of the models alone can, for instance, predict 100% mortality, a standard that some families and clinicians may require in order to limit life-sustaining treatments. Also, as these models focus solely on in-hospital mortality as the outcome measure, a patient’s functional status, quality of life, and long-term prognosis are not predicted. These considerations can be equally as important as short-term survival for families and clinicians in determining appropriate treatment goals. Practically, then, the clinical use of the models is best limited to three uses:As a single ‘data point’ among many to guide patient-centered decision-making. Clinicians can use outcome data from the tools, along with patient co-morbidity, long-term prognosis, baseline and anticipated functional status and quality of life, etc., to guide discussions (seeFast Facts 222-227).Chances are your loved one is not going to survive this illness. She might, and currently we are doing everything we can to get her through this. However, even if she does, her emphysema is severe enough that we will not be able to improve her breathing or ability to take care of herself any more than before she became this ill, and it is very likely another event like this will happen again in the near future. As a screening tool to identify those ICU patients uniquely ‘in need’ of palliative care evaluation.As a research tool to look at the impact of interventions on mortality, morbidity and quality of life.ReferencesZimmerman JE, Kramer AA, McNair DS, Malila FM. Acute physiology and chronic health evaluation (APACHE) IV: hospital mortality assessment for today’s critically ill patients. Crit Care Med. 2006; 34(5):1297-1310.Higgins TL, Teres D, Copes WS, Nathanson BH, Stark M, Kramer AA. Assessing contemporary intensive care unit outcome: an updated mortality probability admission model (MPM0-III). Crit Care Med. 2007; 35(3):827-835.Moreno RP, Metnitz PG, Almeida E, et al. SAPS3—From evaluation for the patient to evaluation of the intensive care unit. Part 2: Development of a prognostic model for hospital mortality at ICU admission. Intensive Care Med. 2005; 31:1345-1355.Ferreira FL, Bota DP, Bross A, Melot C, Vincent J. Serial evaluation of the SOFA score to predict outcome in critically ill patients. JAMA. 2001; 286(14):1754-1758.SAPS3 Software. The SAPS3 Outcome Research Group. Available at:http://saps3.org/index2.html . Accessed April 21, 2010.Teres D, Lemeshow S. Why severity models should be used with caution. Crit Care Clin. 1994; 10(1):93-110.Rogers J, Fuller HD. Use of daily acute physiology and chronic health evaluation (APACHE) II scores to predict individual patient survival rate. Crit Care Med. 1994; 22(9):1402-1405.Author Affiliations: University of Pittsburgh Medical Center, Pittsburgh, PA.
#236 Pharmacologic Treatment of Acute Venous Thromboembolism in Patients with Advanced CancerAUTHORS: René Claxton MD and Robert Arnold MDBackground Venous thromboembolism (VTE) is a common complication of malignancy which carries a poor prognosis (1). ThisFast Fact discusses the approach to VTE in patients with advanced cancer.Does anticoagulation for VTE improve outcomes? There are no randomized, placebo controlled trials of anticoagulation for the treatment of VTE (2). The only study comparing heparin and warfarin for acute pulmonary embolism (PE) versus no treatment found a decrease in mortality with a number needed to treat (NNT) of four (3). Data from non-placebo controlled trials shows anticoagulation for acute VTE decreases recurrence(4) and clot propagation (5). Based on this evidence and clinical consensus, anticoagulation is recommended to decrease mortality and VTE recurrence in patients with a new VTE.What is the best treatment for VTE for cancer patients? Current evidence-based guidelines recommend LMWH instead of oral vitamin K antagonists (e.g. warfarin) to decrease the risk of recurrent VTE in cancer patients. The CLOT trial(6) demonstrated a decreased risk for recurrent VTE in patients maintained on LMWH versus oral anticoagulation with a number needed to treat (NNT) of 13. The major risk of anticoagulation is bleeding. In the CLOT trial major bleeding* occurred in ~5% of patients regardless of the type of anticoagulation. A Cochrane reviewon the topic of anti-coagulation with LMWH versus oral anticoagulants for VTE in patients with cancer identified eight randomized controlled trials with moderate quality evidence (7). It showed a statistically significant decrease in recurrent VTE in favor of LMWH, with a relative risk of 0.51 (CI 0.35-0.74). Novel anticoagulants are under investigation, although not enough is known about them to comment on their use in advanced cancer patients.Does the evidence supporting the use of anti-coagulation for treatment of VTE apply to cancer patients with short prognoses? Unfortunately, most studies exclude patients with increased creatinine, those in bed greater than 50% of the day, and those with less than a three-month prognosis (seeFast Fact #13 ). Thus, there are no research data to guide clinicians on the efficacy (does it prolong life or reduce symptoms?), safety (what is the bleeding risk?), and tolerability of treating acute VTE in cancer patients with prognoses of weeks to a few months.What other considerations should be made in the decision to treat acute VTE in cancer patients with short prognoses?Decide whether to anticoagulate or treat symptomatically. This decision is entirely empiric and should be based on clinical judgment about prognosis, symptom burden, and patient preference. For instance, for a patient with a prior history of VTE who remains ambulatory and who develops symptomatic VTE (e.g. a painful, swollen leg), providing anti-coagulation may be appropriate to prevent additional symptomatic events. If this same patient was already bedbound with a prognosis of weeks, it is doubtful anti-coagulation would provide substantial benefit.If anticoagulation is chosen, then determine whether to use oral anticoagulants or LMWH. LWMH does not require routine laboratory testing, has few drug-drug interactions, is not diet dependent for safe administration, and is more efficacious than warfarin in trials with healthier patients. Warfarin requires frequent laboratory monitoring of the INR and has many drug-drug interactions (8). In addition, a patient’s INR is highly diet dependent and can rise dangerously in patients with diminishing oral intake, which is common for advanced cancer patients. However, LMWH is far more expensive than oral anti-coagulation. Warfarin costs approximately $0.11/day compared to $100/day for enoxaparin. This comparison does not take into account the cost of laboratory tests to monitor a patient’s INR or the administration costs for patients unable to self-administer LMWH. Given its high cost LMWH may not be available for many patients receiving hospice care.Bottom Line The patient’s prognosis and preferences should be considered prior to starting anticoagulation therapy. Clinicians should work with hospice agencies to determine an affordable plan to safely administer and monitor anticoagulation for acute VTE in hospice patients. Clinicians should prepare patients who decide to continue anticoagulation for discontinuing it once expected survival is short or worsening risks such as uncontrolled INR become apparent. *Major bleeding includes any bleeding associated with death, located at a critical site (intracranial, intraspinal, intraocular, retroperitoneal or pericardial area), resulting in the need for a transfusion of at least two units of blood or leading to a drop in hemoglobin of at least 2.0 g per deciliter.ReferencesSorensen HT, Mellemkjoer L, Olsen JH and Baron JA. Prognosis of cancers associated with venous thromboembolism.N Eng J Med. 2000; 343(25):1846-1850.McManus RJ, Fitzmaurice D, Murray ET and Taylor C. Thromboembolism.Clinical Evidence. 2009; 3(208). Retrieved Oct 8, 2009 fromhttp://clinicalevidence.bmj.com/ceweb/conditions/cvd/0208/0208.jsp Barritt DW and Jordan SC. Anticoagulant drugs in the treatment of pulmonary embolism: a controlled trial.Lancet . 1960; 1:1309-1312.Brandjes DP, Heijboer H, Büller HR, de Rijk M, Jagt H, ten Cate JW. Acenocoumarol and heparin compared with acenocoumarol alone in the initial treatment of proximal vein thrombosis.N Engl J Med . 1992; 327(21):1485-1489.Belcaro G, Laurora G, Cesarone MR et al. Prevention of the extension of distal deep venous thrombosis: A randomized controlled trial with a 6 month follow up.Minerva Med . 1997; 88(12):507-514.Lee AY, Levine MN, Baker RI et al. Low-molecular-weight heparin versus a coumarin for the prevention of recurrent venous thromboembolism in patients with cancer.N Engl J Med. 2003; 349(2): 146-153.Akl EA, Barba M, Rohilla S et al. Anticoagulation for the long term treatment of venous thromboembolism in patients with cancer.Cochrane Database Syst Rev . 2008; 16(2):CD006650.Noble SI, Shelley MD, Coles B, Willams SM, Wilcock AW, Johnson MJ. Management of venous thromboembolism in patients with advanced cancer: A systematic review and meta-analysis.Lancet Oncol . 2008; 9(6):577-584.Wright AA, Zhang B, Ray A et al. Associations between end-of-life discussions, patient mental health, medical care near death, and caregiver bereavement adjustment.JAMA. 2008;300(14):1665-1673.Miller SC, Mor V, Wu N, Gozalo P, Lapane K. Does receipt of hospice care in nursing homes improve the management of pain at the end of life?J Am Geriatr Soc . 2002; 50(3):507–515.Author Affiliations: University of Pittsburgh Medical Center, Pittsburgh, PA.ACGME Competencies: Medical Knowledge, Patient Care, Systems Based PracticeKeywords: Non-pain Symptoms, Cancer
#237 Evaluation of Spinal Cord CompressionAuthor: Rohtesh S Mehta MD, MPH and Robert Arnold MDBackground Malignant epidural spinal cord compression (SCC) is a common and devastating complication of cancer (seeFast Fact#62 ). If not diagnosed and treated in a timely manner, SCC can lead to permanent weakness, paraplegia, and loss of bowel and bladder control. ThisFast Fact discusses the clinical features and diagnosis of SCC in adults.Fast Fact#238 discusses its management.Epidemiology Breast, lung, prostate, and multiple myeloma are the most common cancers causing SCC. Cumulative incidence of SCC in the 5 years preceding death is roughly 8% in multiple myeloma, 7% in prostate cancer, 5.5% in breast and 3% in lung cancer patients. The thoracic spine (70%) is the most common site of SCC because of its narrow epidural space and dense vascularization, followed by the lumbosacral (20%) and cervical spines (10%). Hematogenous spread (both arterial and venous) to the vertebral bone and subsequent growth into the epidural space is the most common mechanism of metastasis to the epidural space, although and direct invasion through the neural foramen can also occur. Once in the epidural space, tumor may spread in any direction, including pressing on the dura mater causing ischemia and demyelination of the spinal cord.Symptoms Symptoms usually present in a progressive manner from pain to neurologic deficits. Back pain is the most common and the most sensitive symptom in SCC (>90%), but is non-specific. It can be localized (20-80%), radicular (40-60%), or mechanical (14%), and can worsen with recumbent position (20%) or coughing or sneezing (35-40%). Back pain that is new or changing should raise one’s suspicion of SCC. Pain may be present for 2-3 months before neurological symptoms develop. Motor deficits are more specific for SCC than pain, but present late in its course. The time from the onset of weakness to frank paraplegia can range from less than 24 hours to many weeks. Motor symptoms include progressive motor weakness (60%-95%), ataxia, and subsequently total paralysis. Sensory deficits are less common than motor symptoms (40%-80%). Autonomic symptoms, including bladder (50%) and bowel (75%) complaints occur last in the disease process. These include urinary hesitancy (14%), retention (25%), incontinence (15%), constipation (66%), and fecal incontinence.Signs Physical examination can reveal weakness (85%) and a sensory level of deficit (50-60%), but there is poor correlation between the level of pain and the actual level of compression. More than half of patients with upper thoracic compression present with lumbosacral pain and vice-versa (7). A clinically detected sensory level abnormality is also poorly correlated (16%) with the level of compression identified on MRI.Risk Factors In cancer patients with suspected SCC, the following factors have been associated with an increased risk of having SCC compared to patients without these characteristics: age less than 60 years, inability to walk, middle or upper back pain, abnormal neurologic examination, presence of spinal metastases, radiographically diagnosed compression fractures, bone metastases diagnosed more than 1 year earlier, and metastatic disease at initial cancer diagnosis (3,4).Imaging Because symptoms poorly correlate with compression level, and SCC can occur at multiple levels simultaneously, imaging of the entire spine is recommended. MRI (without contrast) is the imaging modality of choice because of its high sensitivity (93%) and specificity (97%). In addition, MRI reveals if there is compression of the cord versus nerve roots and can provide useful information about the spine’s stability. CT myelography has sensitivity and specificity close to that of MRI, and can be used in patients who cannot get an MRI. Plain films are not sensitive and cannot rule out either vertebral metastases or SCC. If they show vertebral lesions in a suspected area, however, that should increase one’s suspicion of SCC and prompt further investigation. Bone and PET scans can show the presence of vertebral metastases but do not provide information about compression of the spinal cord. CT scans are not recommended due to poor revelation of the epidural space and spinal cord.Conclusion New or worsening back pain in cancer patientswith or without neurological deficits should be evaluated urgently for SCC. Clinicians should have a very low threshold to image a patient’s entire spine with MRI. If a patient has developed any neurologic deficits, glucocorticoids should be administered (seeFast Fact#238 ) and total spine MRI should be performed emergently.ReferencesLoblaw DA, Laperriere NJ, Mackillop WJ. A population-based study of malignant spinal cord compression in Ontario.Clin Oncol (R Coll Radiol) . 2003;15(4):211-7.Zaikova O, Giercksky KE, et al. A population-based study of spinal metastatic disease in South-East Norway.Clin Oncol (R Coll Radiol) . 2009;21(10):753-9.Talcott JA, Stomper PC, Drislane FW, et al. Assessing suspected spinal cord compression: A multidisciplinary outcomes analysis of 342 episodes.Support Care Cancer . 1999;7:31-38Lu, C., Gonzalez, R. G., et al. Suspected spinal cord compression in cancer patients: a multidisciplinary risk assessment.The Journal of Supportive Oncology . 2005;3:305–312.Rades D, Douglas S, Veninga T, et al. Validation and simplification of a score predicting survival in patients irradiated for metastatic spinal cord compression.Cancer . 2010 Apr 29.Cole JS, Patchell RA. Metastatic epidural spinal cord compression.Lancet Neurol . 2008;7(5):459-66.Levack P, Graham J, et al. Don't wait for a sensory level-listen to the symptoms: a prospective audit of the delays in diagnosis of malignant cord compression.Clin Oncol (R Coll Radiol) . 2002;14(6):472-80.White BD, Stirling AJ, Paterson E et al. Diagnosis and management of patients at risk of or with metastatic spinal cord compression: summary of NICE guidance.BMJ . 2008;27:337.Author Affiliations: University of Pittsburgh Medical Center, Pittsburgh, PA.ACGME Competencies: Medical Knowledge, Patient CareKeywords: Other Neurologic Disorders, Cancer
#238 Management of Spinal Cord CompressionAuthors: Rohtesh S Mehta MD, MPH and Robert Arnold MDBackground Metastatic spinal cord compression (SCC) is a medical emergency; early treatment is associated with less functional disability. Treatment options include corticosteroids, radiotherapy and surgery. This Fast Fact discusses management of SCC in adults. Fast Fact #237 discusses its diagnosis.Corticosteroids Dexamethasone is the most tested steroid in clinical trials. Studies have shown that steroids provide analgesia and reduce vasogenic edema which may lead to better neurological outcomes. Treatment should be started as soon as diagnosis is made; studies in acute spinal cord injury suggest significant neurological improvement when used within 8 hours of injury. Historically, debate existed between using high dose dexamethasone (100 mg loading, then 96 mg daily) versus moderate dose (10 mg loading, then 16 mg daily). A randomized controlled trial comparing the two doses found no differences in efficacy and thus most give the lower dose. (1) Many studies give the steroids divided 4 times a day (total 16 mg daily), tapered over 10-14 days. Most generally start IV and then switch to PO when patients are “clinically stable” and more definitive therapy (radiation or surgery) has been initiated. Steroids should be tapered as soon as possible to prevent long term toxicities (2). Common short term side effects include hyperglycemia, insomnia and gastric distress. Serious acute adverse effects such as gastrointestinal perforation or bleeding, psychosis, risk of infections and death are associated with high doses only (17%) (3).Radiotherapy (RT) In the absence of bony instability, RT has historically been the treatment of choice, preferably started within 24 hours of diagnosis. Dose schedule for RT ranges from single fraction 8 Gy to 20 fractions of 40 Gy. One or two fractions of 8 Gy may be preferable in patients with short prognoses and, in one study, had a similar outcome to more prolonged treatment (4). RT results in pain relief in 40-80% of patients and sphincter control in 45-90% of cases (3, 4) when instituted in time. About 90% of ambulatory patients retain ambulation with RT alone, but less than 30% of patients who have lost the ability to walk by the time RT is initiated regain ambulation (3).Surgery Until recently, surgery was reserved for cases with SCC in a previously irradiated area, neurologic deterioration during RT, spinal instability, or bony compression. However a recent meta-analysis (5) and a randomized controlled trial (6) found better functional outcomes with surgery plus post-operative RT as compared to RT alone. This trial used a newer surgical technique (circumferential decompression, reconstruction and immediate stabilization). 84% of the patients in the surgery group were ambulatory and retained ambulation for a longer time (a median of122 days) after treatment compared to 57% in the RT group (median 13 days). 62% of the non-ambulatory patients regained the ability to walk after the surgery compared to 19% in the RT groups. The surgery group also maintained continence for a significantly longer time (median 156 days vs. 17 days). A more recent retrospective matched pair analysis of cancer patients with SCC comparing RT alone to surgery plus RT did not find any significant differences in outcome between the two treatments (7). Prompt, interdisciplinary evaluation by radiation oncologists and spine surgeons is indicated in order to identify the best treatment course.Other treatments Spinal Stereotactic Radiosurgery (SRS) has an investigational role in adult non-surgical patients with radio-resistant tumor or those with previously irradiated areas. Studies suggest more than 80% improvement in overall neurological function (8).Transarterial embolization is another novel investigational treatment. It is generally used preoperatively for hypervascular spinal tumors causing compression, is safe and effective, and can make radical tumor resection possible at times (9). In adults,chemotherapy has no role in acute management even in chemo-sensitive cancers because of its slow effect. Althoughbisphosphonates reduce the incidence of skeletal complications of cancer, there are no data to suggest a benefit in treating SCC.Prognosis Median survival after developing SCC is between 3-6 months in adults. Poor prognostic factors for survival include non-ambulatory status, SCC within 15 months of original cancer diagnosis, presence of visceral or other bone metastases, cancer type (survival is worse for lung cancer and better for myeloma/lymphoma), and rapidity of developing motor symptom (worst if <7 days and better if more than 2 weeks after the onset of symptoms).Conclusion A loading dose of dexamethasone 10 mg IV should be given as soon as possible after diagnosis, followed by maintenance dose of 4 to 6 mg every 6-8 hours, and referral made for primary surgery (if feasible) with adjuvant RT. If surgery is contraindicated, palliative RT alone is indicated.ReferencesVecht CJ, et al. Initial bolus of conventional versus high-dose dexamethasone in metastatic spinal cord compression. Neurology. 1989; 39(9):1255-7.Weissman DE, Dufer D, Vogel V, Abeloff MD. Corticosteroid toxicity in neuro-oncology patients. J Neurooncol. 1987;5(2):125-8George R, Jeba J, Ramkumar G, Chacko AG, Leng M, Tharyan P. Interventions for the treatment of metastatic extradural spinal cord compression in adults. Cochrane Database of Systematic Reviews 2008, Issue 4. Art. No.: CD006716. DOI: 10.1002/14651858.CD006716.pub2Maranzano E, et al. Short-course versus split course radiotherapy in metastatic spinal cord compression: results of a phase III, randomized, multicenter trial. J Clin Oncol. 2005; 23:3358–65Klimo P, et al. A meta-analysis of surgery versus conventional radiotherapy for the treatment of metastatic spinal epidural disease. Neuro Oncol. 2005; 7(1):64-76.Rades D, et al. Validation and simplification of a score predicting survival in patients irradiated for metastatic spinal cord compression. Cancer. 2010; 116:3670-3.Rades D, Huttenlocher S. Matched pair analysis comparing surgery followed by radiotherapy and radiotherapy alone for metastatic spinal cord compression. J Clin Oncol. 2010; 28(22):3597-3604.Ryu S, Rock J, Jain R, et al. Radiosurgical decompression of metastatic epidural compression. Cancer. 2010; 116(9):2250-7Kato S, et al. Surgical management of aggressive vertebral hemangiomas causing spinal cord compression: long-term clinical follow-up of five cases. J Orthop Sci. 2010; 15(3):350-6.Rades D, et al. Validation and simplification of a score predicting survival in patients irradiated for metastatic spinal cord compression. Cancer. 2010; 116:3670-3.Author Affiliations: University of Pittsburgh Medical Center, Pittsburgh, PA.
#239 Prognostication in Severe Traumatic Brain Injury in AdultsAuthors: Stacy M Kessler MD and Keith M Swetz MDBackground Traumatic brain injury (TBI) is defined as brain injury caused by an external force – most commonly falls, struck by/against events, motor vehicle collisions, and assaults. The vast majority of patients with mild to moderate TBIs have substantial recoveries; this is not true of severe TBIs. ThisFast Fact discussesprognostication in severe TBI in adults.Initial TBI severity TBI severity is most commonly graded by the initial Glasgow Coma Scale (GCS) score. The GCS rates the patient’s best verbal response, best motor response and the stimulus needed to elicit eye opening. Scores range from 3-15, with score ≤ 8 representing coma. ‘Mild’ TBI (accounting for ~80% of cases) is manifest by a 30 minute post-injury GCS of 13-15. ‘Moderate’ TBI consists of immediately altered or loss of consciousness for > 30 minutes and 6 hour post-injury GCS of 9-12. ‘Severe TBI’ involves immediate loss of consciousness for > 6 hours with residual GCS of 3-8.Long-term outcomes The Glasgow Outcome Scale (GOS) is a five-point scale used widely in brain injury research. An eight-point Extended Glasgow Outcome Scale (GOS-E) is available with more sensitivity to change in function, but most outcome studies have referenced only the GOS. The GOS range is (1) death, (2) persistent vegetative state (unconscious and unable to interact), (3) severe disability (conscious; cannot live independently; requires daily assistance due to physical or mental impairment), (4) moderate disability (able to live independently; able to work in a supported environment), and (5) good recovery (minimal or no deficits; able to work and socialize normally). In addition to global functional impairments, survivors of severe TBIs often have impairments in memory, executive functioning, impulse control, sensory processing, and communication skills. Mental health problems are common.Predicting outcomes Overall 30-day mortality following TBI is estimated to be 20% with the highest mortality corresponding to the worst initial GCS scores. For patients with reliable initial GCS scores of 3-5, only 20% will survive and less half of those survivors will have what is often referred to in the research literature as a ‘good outcome’ (GOS 4-5). Older age, lower initial GCS score, abnormal initial pupil reactivity, longer length of coma and duration of post-traumatic amnesia, and certain computed tomography findings all indicate a smaller chance of recovery to GOS 4-5. Kothrari proposed the following prognostic guidelines, based on a comprehensive review of studies that looked at outcome in adults 6 months or later after severe TBI [8]:Favorable outcome (GOS 4-5) likely when the time to follow commands is less than 2 weeks after injury, and the duration of post-traumatic amnesia is less than 2 months.Poor outcome (GOS <4) is likely when the patient is over 65 years old, the time to follow commands is longer than 1 month, or the duration of post-traumatic amnesia is greater than 3 months.Notably, 10% of patients will not have the outcome predicted by the guidelines above. A recent multinational collaborative trial developed a prognostic model to predict outcomes in TBI. The model uses age, GCS, pupil reactivity, presence of major extracranial injury, and (optional) computed tomography findings to give rates of death at 14 days post-injury and GOS at 6 months for survivors. An on-line calculator is available [10].Helping families make decisions Families of patients with severe TBIs may be confronted with decisions about medical care (e.g. gastrostomy tube placement, chronic ventilatory support, dialysis). Such decisions often depend on a family’s understanding of a patient’s long-term functional outcome. The above-mentioned prognostic indicators can help clinicians provide objective information for families about the likelihood of recovery after a TBI. As with all prognostic tools, however, clinicians can only predict what would happen to a population of patients with a similar injury (e.g. ‘only 10% of patients would recover such that they could live independently’); this is different from predicting any particular patient’s course. It is important to communicate the uncertainty that accompanies most prognostic estimations. Counseling families about long-term functional prognosis, as well as the expected treatment course (what rehabilitation would involve) is important. While the research literature often defines a ‘good recovery’ as GOS 4-5, that may not constitute a ‘good’ recovery for an individual patient. Clinicians should avoid such language at the bedside and instead use detailed descriptive language of expected functional and cognitive outcomes. Early and frequent family meetings can facilitate communication, built rapport, and are vital in expectation setting and establishing goals of care. If life sustaining treatments are initiated, framing the treatments in the context of time-limited trials is helpful. This empowers family members to discontinue certain cares after a specified period of time if the prognosis remains unchanged or if the treatment is not meeting the goals of care (e.g. helping to restore a patient to a functional status which is acceptable to the patient). Interdisciplinary team members including speech, occupational, and physical therapists, physiatrists, neurologists, palliative care clinicians, and neurosurgeons can be important in letting family members more fully understand a patient’s likely future. SeeFast Fact #226 about helping surrogates make decisions.ReferencesCenters for Disease Control and Prevention. “Get the Stats on TBI in the United States.” Available at:http://www.cdc.gov/traumaticbraininjury/factsheets_reports.html . Accessed November 3, 2010.Carroll LJ, Cassidy JD, Peloso PM, Borg J, von Holst H, Holm L, Paniak C, Pépin M; WHO Collaborating Centre Task Force on Mild Traumatic Brain Injury. Prognosis for mild traumatic brain injury: results of the WHO Collaborating Centre Task Force on Mild Traumatic Brain Injury.J Rehabil Med. 2004; 43(Suppl):S84-S105.Serio CD, Kreutzer JS, Witol AD. Family needs after traumatic brain injury: a factor analytic study of the Family Needs Questionnaire.Brain Injury . 1997; 11:1-9.Kolakowsky-Hayner SA, Miner KD, Kretuzer JS. Long-term life quality and family needs after traumatic brain injury.J Head Trauma Rehabil . 2001; 16:374-385.Cifu DX, Kreutzer JS, Slater DN, Taylor L. Rehabilitation after Traumatic Brain Injury. In: Braddom RL, Buschbacher RM, Chan L, et al, eds.Physical Medicine and Rehabilitation. Philadelphia, PA: Saunders Elsevier; 2007: 1133-1174.National Institute of Neurological Disorders and Stroke. Traumatic brain injury: hope through research. Bethesda (MD): National Institutes of Health; 2002. NIH Publication No. 02-158. Available at:http://www.ninds.nih.gov/disorders/tbi/detail_tbi.htm . Accessed November 3, 2010.Brown AW, Elovic EP, Kothari S, Flanagan SR, Kwasnica C. Congenital and acquired brain injury. 1. Epidemiology, Pathophysiology, Prognostication, Innovative Treatments, and Prevention.Arch Phys Med Rehabil. 2008;89 (Suppl):S3-S8.Kothari S. Prognosis after severe TBI: a practical, evidence-based approach. In: Zasler ND, Katz DI, Zafonte RD, eds.Brain Injury Medicine: Principles and Practice. New York: Demos; 2007: 169-99MRC CRASH Trial Collaborators, Perel P, Arango M, Clayton T, Edwards P, Komolafe E, Poccock S, Roberts I, Shakur H, Steyerberg E, Yutthakasemsunt S. Predicting outcome after traumatic brain injury: practical prognostic models based on large cohort of international patients.BMJ. 2008 Feb 23; 336(7641):425-9.Prognostic model for predicting outcome after traumatic brain injury (online calculator). MRC Crash Trial website. Available at:http://www.crash2.lshtm.ac.uk/Risk%20calculator/index.html . Accessed January 5, 2011.Brain Trauma Foundation-American Association of Neurological Surgeons-Joint Section on Neurotrauma and Critical care. Early indicators of prognosis in severe traumatic brain injury.J Neurotrauma. 2000; 17:449-627.Author Affiliations: Mayo Clinic, Rochester, MN.
#240 LevorphanolAuthor: Jane E Loitman MDOverview Levorphanol, a “forgotten” potent opioid agonist, has unique attributes(1). ThisFast Fact summarizes its pharmacology and role in pain management.Pharmacology Levorphanol is a unique opioid, with both similarities to and important differences from methadone (seeFast Facts #75 ,86 ,171 about methadone pharmacology).Levorphanol is an agonist at the mu, kappa, and delta opioids receptors, an NMDA antagonist, and a monoamine reuptake inhibitor of norepinephrine and serotonin(10). Similar to methadone, levorphanol has a long half-life, and an elimination half-life which is longer than its analgesic duration of action (patients can still have significant tissue and serum levels of levorphanol even after its analgesic effect has waned). Levorphanol’s analgesic half-life is comparable to methadone’s (6-8 hours), however its elimination half-life of ~11 hours is more predictable than methadone’s(9) . Accumulation and toxicity can occur if levorphanol’s dose is increased too quickly, without waiting for steady-state to occur (at ~5 elimination half-lives or 2-3 days).Drug concentrations peak 30 minutes after parenteral injection and 1 hour after oral doses.An oral dose undergoes approximately 50% first-pass clearance.Levorphanol is metabolized via conjugation to a 3-glucuronide; the cytochrome P450 system does not appear to be involved. It has no known active metabolites. Side effects are similar to other opioids. There are no documented studies showing QT interval prolongation or Torsades de Pointes.Clinical Uses Several properties of levorphanol make it of interest as an analgesic.Similar to methadone, levorphanol’s longer duration of action is not affected by crushing, and it can be safely administered down a gastrostomy tube.Levorphanol lacks the stigma associated with methadone and its use in addiction medicine.Levorphanol is a strong NMDA receptor antagonist which has generated interest in it as a treatment for neuropathic pain. Limited research has supported its role as an effective treatment for neuropathic pain, allodynia, and hyperalgesia(2,3,4,5). Rowbotham demonstrated a dose-response curve with oral levorphanol for patients with neuropathic pain; 9 mg daily was more effective than 3 mg(2). As with methadone, levorphanol has not been directly compared with other opioids or adjuvant analgesics for neuropathic pain.McNulty showed in a recent case series of 31 patients (including hospice patients and chronic non-malignant pain patients) that 74% of patients had improved pain relief when switching to levorphanol in the setting of inadequately controlled pain on other opioids(6) .Dosing Parenteral levorphanol is twice as potent as the oral formulation. Published oral morphine:oral levorphanol equianalgesic ratios range from 30:4 to 12:1(4, 6). The most recent case series looking at switching from other opioids to levorphanol used a staggered morphine:levorphanol ratio(6) , similar in concept to switching to methadone (see Table). Available data indicate these ratios are reasonably safe and effective. The medication is dosed every 6 – 12 hours depending on an individual patient’s duration of analgesia. Opioid naïve patients can start with 6 mg orally a day, divided. Levorphanol is available in 2 mg tablets and 2 mg/ml or 2 mg/10ml parenteral formulations.Table. Conversions to Levorphanol(6) . Baseline 24 hour Oral Morphine Equivalent Morphine:Levorphanol Ratio <100 mg 12:1 (e.g. 60 mg PO morphine/24h = 5 mg PO levorphanol/24h)100-299 mg 15:1300-599 mg 20:1600-799 mg 25:1>800 mg No dataCost Levorphanol is relatively expensive. A 2 mg tablet is roughly 10 times more expensive than an equivalent dose tablet of methadone and 2 times more expensive than an equivalent dose of a sustained-release morphine tablet.Conclusion Levorphanol is a unique opioid analgesic, has pharmacologic properties which may make it particularly suited for patients with neuropathic pain, and recent data suggesting it is a safe and effective opioid in patients having inadequate response to other opioids.ReferencesPrommer E. Levorphanol: the forgotten opioid. Supp Care in Cancer. 2007; 15:259–264.Rowbotham MC, Twilling L, Davies PS, Reisner L, Taylor K, Mohr D: Oral opioid therapy for Chronic Peripheral and Central Neuropathic Pain. N Engl J Med. 2003; 348:1223–1232.Foley KM: Opioids and chronic neuropathic pain. N Engl J Med. 2003; 348:1279–1281.Hutson PR, Williams KJ. Methadone, buprenorphine and levorphanol: alternatives for treatment of chronic pain a comparison of the unique properties of each drug and clinical advantages and disadvantages of their use. JPSW. 2009; January/February. Available at:http://www.pswi.org/communications/journal/2009/Methadone%20Buprenorphine%20and%20Levorphanol%20Alternatives%20for%20Treatment%20of%20Chronic%20Pain.htm . Accessed January 5, 2011.Schofferman J, Mazanec D. Evidence-informed management of chronic low back pain with opioid analgesics. The Spine Journal. 2008; 8:185–194.McNulty J. Can levorphanol be used like methadone for intractable refractory pain? J Pall Med. 2007; 10(2):293-296.Bonn B, Masimirembwa CM, Castagnoli N. Exploration of catalytic properties of CYP2D6 and CYP3A4 through metabolic studies of levorphanol and levallorphan.Drug Metab Dispos. 2010; 38(1):187-199.Dixon R, Crews T, Inturrisi C, Foley K. Levorphanol: pharmacokinetics and steady-state plasma concentrations in patients with pain. Res Commun Chem Pathol Pharmacol. 1983; 41:3–17.Narcotic Analgesics Comparative Review. In: DRUGDEX® System [Internet database]. Greenwood Village, CO: Thomson Healthcare. Updated periodically.Tive L, Ginsberg K, Pick CG, Pasternak GW. Kappa3 receptors and levorphanol-induced analgesia. Neuropharm. 1992; 31(9):851-856.American Pain Society. Principles of Analgesic Use in the Treatment of Acute Pain and Cancer Pain. 6th Ed. Chicago, IL; American Pain Society; 2008.Author Affiliation: Washington University School of Medicine, St Louis, MO.ACGME Competencies: Medical Knowledge, Patient CareKeyword(s): Pain – Opioids
#241 Improving Communication When Hearing Loss is PresentAuthor: Priscilla Bade MDBackground One in six Americans has impaired hearing, with higher prevalence among the elderly. Hearing loss can pose a barrier to effective communication. ThisFast Fact discusses ways to improve communication with patients with hearing loss.Consequences of hearing loss Hearing loss can lead to misunderstandings, which in the health care setting can literally have life-or-death implications. Patients or family members can misunderstand treatment options and instructions for medications and appointments. They may have trouble hearing on the telephone (or even that the telephone is ringing). Clinicians may incorrectly assume they have cognitive impairment. Hearing loss can have emotional impact including social isolation, loss of self-esteem due to communication mistakes, and frustration at the difficulty with communication. People may withdraw and/or become depressed. Persons living with people who have hearing loss also may experience anger and frustration at the effort it takes to communicate. Since speech comprehension takes added mental effort when hearing loss is present, persons who are delirious, fatigued, in pain or otherwise distracted often have increased trouble understanding what is said. Other factors which affect the ability to understand speech include background noise, poor lighting (which impedes lip reading), soft or rapid speech, and use of unfamiliar words such as medical terminology.Identifying patients with hearing loss Congenitally deaf people usually identify themselves as such, and may prefer communication with sign language. In this case, a health care interpreter who is fluent in sign language should be used (seeFast Fact #154 ). Acquired hearing loss is often invisible. Many people with acquired hearing loss do not realize that they have it, or underestimate the degree of its impact on communication. Most people with acquired hearing loss acquire it later in life and are unlikely to know sign language. They may smile and nod without admitting that they did not understand. The person may fail to respond to a request or a question, or may answer incorrectly based on what he or she thought was said. He may say “What?” or ask you to repeat. Hearing aids and cochlear implants, while helpful, do not restore perfect hearing. Many who could use them do not, due to cost, inconvenience, or denial.Techniques to improve communication with persons with hearing lossReduce background noise and distractions as much as possible.Create opportunities for the person to have a trusted, non-hearing impaired support person present during the conversation to assist with understanding and memory of the information.Make sure you have the person’s attention before starting a conversation.Ensure that the listener can see your face. Sit or stand at eye level and face her or him. Have the listener wear eyeglasses if necessary. Ensure adequate lighting on the face of the speakers.Speak distinctly and clearly. Avoid shouting if possible: this can make you sound angry and will distort the shapes of words on your lips.Ask the person if she or he can hear you, and if there is anything you need to do to help him or her understand you. Use gestures, spelling and writing as needed to clarify. A dry-erase board and marker or notebook can be kept at the bedside.Ask the person to summarize what he or she heard. This will help to identify misunderstandings before one of you departs, and will reinforce teaching.Use technology. Persons with hearing aids should be encouraged to wear them during discussions (and to bring spare batteries). Those without hearing aids may benefit from personal amplifiers or assistive listening devices. Text telephone relay services (which transcribe voice-to-text) or secure e-mail may be useful alternate forms of communication. Particularly in the hospital setting, clinicians should seek assistance from speech language pathologists to help maximize a patient’s ability to communicate.Additional Resources: Hearing Loss Association of America (available at:http://www.hearingloss.org ) and Better Hearing Institute (available at:http://www.betterhearing.org ).References:Bade PF. Hearing Impairment. InGeriatrics Review Syllabus: A Core Curriculum in Geriatric Medicine . 7th ed. New York: American Geriatrics Society; 2010.Bogardus ST, Yueh B, Shekelle P. Screening and Management of adult hearing loss in primary care: clinical applications.JAMA. 2003; 289(15):1986-90.Lezzoni LI, O’Day BL, Killeen M, et al. Communicating about health care: observations from persons who are deaf or hard of hearing.Ann Intern Med. 2004; 140(5):356-62.Author Affiliations: Sanford School of Medicine at the University of South Dakota; Hospice of the Hills, Rapid City, SD.
#242 Organ Donation after Cardiac DeathAUTHORS: Dana Lustbader MD, FCCM, FCCP and Michael J Goldstein MDBackground Organ donation after cardiac death (DCD) refers to organ donation from a deceased donor who has been declared dead on the basis of cardio-pulmonary criteria (permanent cessation of circulatory and respiratory function) rather than on neurological “brain death” criteria (permanent cessation of brain function – seeFast Fact #115 ). ThisFast Fact reviews key elements of the DCD process.Two Types of Organ DonationDonation after death by neurologic criteria occurs when a comatose patient meets brain death criteria. After obtaining consent from the family, the donor is brought to the operating room on the ventilator. Organ procurement occurs in the operating room while the patient remains intubated with a beating heart.Donation after cardiac death occurs when a decision is made to discontinue mechanical ventilation/other life-sustaining treatments in a comatose or gravely ill patient who is expected to die quickly after cessation of life-support. Depending on hospital policy, the patient may be extubated in the operating room (OR) to minimize the time between death and organ procurement in order to optimize donor organ viability for transplantation. Most organ procurement organizations (OPO) have guidelines governing the amount of time between extubation and death during which the organs are considered viable for transplantation. This is generally 60 minutes. If the patient survives longer than that, excessive organ ischemia occurs rendering the patient an unsuitable donor. The patient is then returned to the ICU or other appropriate location for end-of-life care.Selecting Patients for DCD Appropriate patients are generally comatose patients for whom a decision has been made to discontinue life-sustaining treatments with the expectation of imminent death. The decision to discontinue life-sustaining treatments is made prior to any discussions of organ donation. Most institutions have policies and procedures which alert the OPO of potential donors. After discussion with their medical director and recipient transplant centers, the OPO determines donor suitability. Trained professionals – usually OPO representatives – approach the family about organ donation, and consent the family/patient decision makers for organ donation. Potential donors are generally between 0 and 60 years of age. Patients should not meet the criteria for death by neurologic criteria (they are candidates for organ donation via brain death protocols). The OPO staff prognosticate whether the patient is sufficiently likely to die within the 60 minute window after cessation of life-prolonging treatments. This estimate is based on physiologic parameters including spontaneous respiratory rate, negative inspiratory force, age, oxygen saturation, level of hemodynamic instability, and body mass index (BMI).ProcedureFamilies are counseled about what to expect during the discontinuation of life-sustaining treatments and what to expect as the patient receives comfort care. Hospitals may have policies requiring the patient to have a DNR order while awaiting the DCD procedure; in others the decision to resuscitate a patient or not in order to attempt to maintain the patient as a viable organ donor is a negotiated decision. Families should be prepared for the possibility that the patient may not die quickly after the ventilator is withdrawn and that the patient may become an unsuitable donor. This occurs in about 20-30% of DCD cases nationally. This can cause added emotional trauma to grieving families who may want both a swift and comfortable death for their loved one as well as the opportunity to help others through organ donation. Families should be reassured that the patient will continue to receive careful symptom management until she or he die no matter how long that takes.In order to prevent conflicts of interest, members of the OPO and organ recovery teams should not be involved in the decision to discontinue life-support, or in directing the medical care of the patient prior to the declaration of death. Because of this, intensivists, palliative care physicians, or other clinicians may be asked to direct the care of the dying donor after extubation.Once consent is obtained from a legal surrogate and appropriate teams are ready, discontinuation of life-sustaining treatments begins. Extubation generally occurs in the operating room but may occur in a nearby ICU or recovery area based upon local hospital practice. Many hospital policies allow family members to be present in the operating room until the patient dies.The patient may be given pre-extubation medications to relieve anticipated distress. These medications, as well as symptom medications given after cessation of life-support, should be given in the exact same way as in non-DCD situations to alleviate signs of pain, labored breathing, and other symptoms (seeFast Facts 33 ,34 and35 ).The patient is extubated to room air. Other lines and tubes are discontinued as deemed appropriate to maximize patient comfort. All non-comfort medications are discontinued including vasoactive agents.Declaration of death is based on hospital policy. Usually policies require apnea and 2 to 5 minutes of asystole or pulseless electrical activity. The hospital’s DCD policy will outline the exact criteria for declaring cardiac death.Following death pronouncement the patient is taken to the OR, or the organ recovery team enters the OR where the patient died and procurement begins. The organ recovery team never encounters the patient’s family during the DCD process.If the patient does not die in a reasonable amount of time as determined by the organ procurement organization, the patient is returned to a location in the hospital for ongoing symptomatic treatment until death occurs. Ongoing emotional and bereavement support should occur for family members throughout the process.ReferencesEthics Committee, American College of Critical Care Medicine, Society of Critical Care Medicine. Recommendations for nonheartbeating organ donation.Crit Care Med. 2001; 29(9):1826-1831.Truog RD, Miller FG. The dead donor rule and organ transplantation.N Engl J Med. 2008; 359:674-5.Steinbrook R. Organ donationafter cardiac death.N Engl J Med. 2007; 357:209-213.Abt P, Fisher CA, Singhal AK. Donation after cardiac death in the US: history and use.J Am Coll Surg . 2006; 203(2):208-225. Kolovos NS , Webster P , Bratton SL . Donation after cardiac death in pediatric critical care.Ped Crit Care Med. 2007; 8(1):76-77.Author Affiliations: Hofstra North Shore – Long Island Jewish School of Medicine, Manhasset, NY (DL); Mount Sinai Medical Center, New York, NY (MJG).ACGME Competencies: Patient Care & Systems Based Practice
#243 Palliative Care for Patients with Down SyndromeAUTHORS: Jane E Loitman MD and Gail Gazelle MDBackground: Down syndrome (DS), or Trisomy 21, is the most common chromosome abnormality among liveborn infants, characterized by dysmorphic features, impaired intellectual ability, various cardiac septal defects, short stature, other anomalies, and reduced life expectancy. ThisFast Fact discusses the natural history of DS and issues specific to palliative and end-of-life care for patients with DS.Fast Facts#192 and193 discussed end-of-life care for patients with developmental disabilities in general.Causes of Morbidity and Death in DS: Patients with DS frequently live to 60 years of age, men somewhat longer than women.Childhood mortality is most often associated with congenital heart defects or leukemia. The risk of developing childhood acute lymphoblastic leukemia is ten to twenty times higher in DS than the general population. Leukemia is treatable, although recurrences typically occur with an aggressive and terminal course (3-5).Midlife mortality is associated most often with pulmonary disease and problems related to congenital cardiac defects. The incidence of coronary artery disease and solid-tumor malignancies is actually lower in people with DS than in the general population.People with DS have a much higher incidence of dementia of the Alzheimer’s type (DAT) than the general population, and tend to develop DAT in their 40s and 50s. By age 60, 75% of individuals with DS have developed DAT. Brain autopsies reveal amyloid plaques and neurofibrillary tangles; this may be due to chromosome 21 housing the amyloid precursor protein gene.In addition to cognitive issues, other common medical issues may include hearing impairment, cataracts, sleep apnea, dental issues, congenital cardiac septal defects, thyroid dysfunction, seizures, arthroses, osteoporosis, chronic constipation, GERD, incontinence, congenital hip dislocation, behavioral issues, and recurrent respiratory infections (6).Partial or tonic-clonic seizures are most common in the first year of life and in or after the third decade (7,8). Once seizures occur, the pace of functional decline often increases.Routine symptom management principles apply to patients with DS, acknowledging communication limitations that can limit comprehensive assessment. Polypharmacy can contribute to or exacerbate issues so rigorous care must be paid when medications are started or stopped.Psychosocial issues: Psychosocial domains include communication, self-care, grief, and family circumstances. In addition, there are unique issues that may complicate end-of-life decision making.Patients with DS and their loved ones and caregivers have experienced a lifelong disease trajectory, which includes mental retardation, medical, and psychosocial issues. The lifelong toll on families is high. Part of a robust plan of care includes acknowledgment of this toll by healthcare providers.Many people with DS reside in institutional settings where the primary caregivers are not family members. Many have lost parents to death and sometimes have no contact with other family. While it is not known how people with DS process these losses, maximal supports regarding grief and loss should be put in place.Issues such as guardianship and advance care planning should be addressed as early as possible with caregivers of people with DS.Whenever possible, decision makers for people with DS should be encouraged to use substituted judgment to make key palliative care decisions. All efforts should be made to determine the preferences of the patient, however because of lifelong cognitive impairment, the views of the person with DS may not be known. There may also be disability rights concerns that make proxies/guardians wary of not instituting all life-sustaining measures. Intensive education needs to be provided regarding the benefits and burdens of any medical interventions, with particular emphasis on how these will impact quality of life. Healthcare providers need to make sure that their own views about quality of life do not interfere with respecting the wishes of designated decision-makers – seeFast Fact #193.Key teaching pointsThe signs of aging and dementia that occur in the general population occur in patients with DS at a much younger age and with a different pattern.Prognostication in people with DS is different than for the general population. Although no guidelines exist, the diagnosis of end of life may be late and accompanied by a precipitous decline. The presence of DAT and/or seizures should be considered when making assessments such as eligibility for hospice.Care may be complicated by behavioral and assessment difficulties as well as caregiver issues.Because patients with DS often have a longstanding lack of competence, proxies/guardians will typically not be able to utilize substituted judgment in making key decisions. Intensive education regarding how medical interventions will affect quality of life is a key part of any plan of care.ReferencesVisser FE, Aldenkamp AP, Van Huffelen AC, et al. Prospective study of the prevalence of Alzheimer-type dementia in institutionalized individuals with Down syndrome.Am J Mental Retardation. 1997; 101(4):400-412.Wisniewski KE, Wisniewski HM, Wen GY. Occurrence of neuropathological changes and dementia of Alzheimer’s disease in Down’s syndrome.Ann Neurol . 1985;17:278-282Ryeom S, Folkman J. Role of endogenous angiogenesis inhibitors in down syndrome.J Craniofacial Surg. 2009;20:595-596.Ravindranath Y, Abella E, Krischer JP, et al. Acute myeloid leukemia (AML) in Down's Syndrome is highly responsive to chemotherapy: experience on Pediatric Oncology Group AML Study 8498.Blood . 1993; 81(11):3164.Al-Kasim F, Doyle JJ, Massey GV, et al. Incidence and treatment of potentially lethal diseases in transient leukemia of Down syndrome: Pediatric Oncology Group study.J Pediatr Hematol Oncol. 2002; 24:9-13.HendersonA, LynchSA, WilkinsonS. Adults with Down's Syndrome: the prevalence of complications and health care in the community.Br J Gen Pract. 2007; 57(534):50–55.Pueschel SM, Louis S, McKnight P. Seizure disorders in Down syndrome.Arch Neurol. 1991; 48(3):318-3.Lott IT, Dierssen M. Cognitive deficits and associated neurological complications in individuals with Down’s syndrome.Lancet Neurol. 2010; 9:623-33.Author Affiliation: Washington University School of Medicine, St Louis, MO (JEL); Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA (GG).
#244 Screening for Opioid Misuse and AbuseAuthors: Rene Claxton MD and Robert Arnold MDBackground: Opioid analgesics are effective in relieving both cancer and chronic non-malignant pain but can be misused and abused by patients and others (1, 2). Clinicians need to identify patients at risk of misusing prescribed opioids in order to prescribe and monitor opioid therapy safely. ThisFast Fact discusses how clinicians can screen for risk of misuse. SeeFast Facts #68, 69, 110, and 127 for further discussions about differentiating pain complaints from abuse, urine drug testing, and substance use disorders in palliative care patients.Definitions: Medicationmisuse is the intentional or unintentional use of a prescribed medication other than as directed. Misuse can include a patient taking more pain medicine than prescribed to control otherwise inadequately controlled pain as well as abusive and addictive behaviors.Abuse refers to the intentional self-administration of a medication for non-medical purpose or the use of an illegal drug.Addiction is a primary, chronic disease defined by one or more of the following behaviors: impaired control over drug use, compulsive use, continued use despite harm, and craving (4).Aberrant behavior is a research term defined differently by various investigators which typically includes activities of misuse and abuse.Benefits of Screening:Opioid therapy is a safe and effective treatment for pain in many patients. However, opioid misuse carries the risk of development of addiction, overdose, and death which require providers to balance individual patient’s pain and risk levels. Patients with high risk for opioid misuse should not necessarily be denied opioid therapy but should be followed under closer supervision than those patients with lower risk estimates. In patients with short life expectancies, clinicians may be willing to accept greater risk in prescribing opioids than in patients with chronic non-malignant pain. However, providers should remember that opioids do not improve quality of life for patients who misuse them as a remedy for other symptoms such as anxiety or existential suffering, and that active substance abuse is as devastating to terminally ill patients and families as it is to others (5).Risk Factors:Risk factors for misuse can be grouped into three categories: biological, social and psychological. Biological risk factors include family history of drug abuse and male gender. Social risk factors include poor social support and history of convictions related to drugs or driving while impaired by substances. Psychological risk factors include a personal history of substance abuse (including alcohol or tobacco), pre-adolescent history of sexual abuse, and co-morbid psychiatric illness (i.e. major depression, bipolar disorder, personality disorder) (6).Screening for Misuse:No screening tests have been developed to screen for opioid misuse specifically in cancer patients. However, several screening tests predict the potential for opioid misuse in patients with chronic non-malignant pain. Common instruments include the Screener and Opioid Assessment for Pain Patients (SOAPP) and the Opioid Risk Tool (ORT). While these tools can be applied to patients seen in palliative care settings (such as cancer patients or patients with advanced illnesses), clinicians should be aware they have not been validated in these patient populations.Clinicians should always keep in mind that these are screening tools used to identify high-risk patients appropriate for close monitoring and further assessment, but are not diagnostic tools to diagnose substance use disorders or to definitively identify patients who should not be prescribed opioids for pain. In addition, they do not assess the risk of diversion of drugs by family or community members.The SOAPP predicts risk potential for aberrant drug behavior via a 14-item self-report. Items included in the SOAPP cluster into categories of: antisocial behavior, substance abuse history, doctor/patient relationship, medication-related behaviors, and psychiatric and neurobiologic need for medicine. Responses are based on a 5 point Likert scale (possible score range 0-56). Using 7 as cut off, this test had a sensitivity of 91%, specificity of 69%, positive predictive value (PPV) of 71% and negative predictive value (NPV) of 90% (7) to predict aberrant drug behavior. It is important to note that while a score of 7 maximizes this test’s sensitivity, i.e. identifies most patients with a risk of opioid misuse, it will also result in a large number of false positive tests given the lower specificity at this cut-off.The ORT is a 5-item yes/no tool which predicts the probability of opioid misuse or abuse among patients being considered for opioid therapy for chronic pain. This measure is based on several risk factors including: family history of substance abuse, personal history of substance abuse, age (16-45 years is a risk factor), history of pre-adolescent sexual abuse, and psychological disease. This tool categorizes patients as low, medium or high risk for aberrant behavior. The sensitivity and specificity for the test for patients who score at least ‘medium risk’ is 99% and 16%, respectively. For those with ‘high risk’ scores, the test sensitivity is 53% and specificity 96% (8). Because clinicians administering the ORT could be misled by patients with a history of opioid use who downplay past behavior, it is best to apply the tool in lower-risk clinical settings such as primary care rather than in higher risk settings.Which method is the best way to predict opioid misuse or abuse?:In a study of 48 chronic pain patients, the sensitivity of predicting aberrant behavior was compared using three different methods: a trained psychologist’s clinical interview, SOAPP and ORT. The clinical interview showed highest sensitivity (77%). SOAPP showed a sensitivity of 73% (score ≥6 as cut-off). ORT showed sensitivity of 45% (score ≥4 as cut-off) (9).Bottom Line:Given the limited number of studies comparing and validating these instruments, it is reasonable to choose a measure based on practicality such as familiarity, ease and time of completion or patient versus provider administration (both the SOAPP and ORT can be completed by patients in less than 10 minutes). Regardless of whether one uses a tool, a thorough history including personal and family history of psychiatric conditions, substance abuse, and sexual abuse is key to identifying patients who need closer assessment and monitoring.Additional Resources: For an electronic version of the SOAPP, click here:http://www.painedu.org/soapp.asp . For an electronic version of the ORT, click here:http://www.opioidrisk.com/node/884 .References:Gordon DB, Dahl JL, Miaskowski C, et al. American Pain Society Recommendations for improving the quality of acute and cancer pain management.A rch Intern Med. 2005; 165:1574-80.Portenoy RK, Foley KM. Chronic use of opioid analgesics in non-malignant pain: report of 38 cases.Pain. 1986; 25:171-186.National Drug Intelligence Center.National Prescription Drug Threat Assessment 2009 . April 2009. Available at:http://www.justice.gov/ndic/pubs33/33775/distribution.htm . Accessed March 16, 2011.Katz NP, et al. Challenges in the development of prescription opioid abuse-deterrent formulations.Clin J Pain. 2007; 23:648-660.Passik SD. Theobald DE. Managing addiction in advanced cancer patients: why bother?J Pain Symptom Manage. 2000; 19:229-34.Katz NP, et al. Foundations of opioid risk management.Clin J Pain. 2007; 23:103-118.Butler SF, et al. Validation of a screener and opioid assessment measure for patients with chronic pain.Pain. 2004; 112:65-75.Webster LR, Webster RM. Predicting aberrant behaviors in opioid-treated patients: preliminary validation of the opioid risk tool.Pain Med . 2005; 6:432-442.Moore TM, et al. A comparison of common screening methods for predicting aberrant behavior among patients receiving opioids for chronic pain management.Pain Med. 2009; 10:1426-1433.Author Affiliation:University of Pittsburgh Medical Center, Pittsburgh, PA.ACGME : patient care, pbli.
#245 Addressing Medical-Legal Suffering for Patients with Advanced IllnessAuthors: Lynn Hallarman MD and Denise Snow JD, RNBackground Unresolved financial and legal issues can be a source of intense suffering and adversely impact a patient’s ability to cope with the extreme challenge of advanced illness. ThisFast Fact will introduce readers to financial/legal distress in patients with advanced illness, as well as ways to help ameliorate it including Medical-Legal Partnerships (MLP).Patients at higher risk of financial/legal distress include those who express concern about:Finances: particularly patients who are uninsured, the sole wage earner in their family, or who are seeking particular benefits/statuses such as Social Security Disability, service-connection benefits for veterans, etc.Dependents: particularly if the patient is a single parent with children under 18 years; in a same-sex partnership in which the surviving partner does not have parental or guardianship rights for the minor children; or if the patient has disabled children of any age.Family: particularly patients with no close relatives, or who have key relationships which are not legally recognized (e.g. unmarried couples, particularly same-sex partnerships).Legal Status: particularly immigrants who do not have citizen status in the country they reside in.Screening for and responding to distress Clinicians can ask patientsAre there any particular financial or legal concerns you have in light of your [advanced illness]? Some concerns can be addressed with a referral to a hospital or clinic social worker, such as completion of a heath care agent/health care power of attorney document (in most states), or application for publically supported insurance. Other concerns, such as completion of financial wills; establishing financial trusts; appealing denial of disability benefits; ensuring acceptable guardianship for minor children; and addressing immigration concerns for a dying patient or her/his survivors, will need legal advocacy. MLPs are an increasingly available method to provide legal advocacy for patients who cannot otherwise afford it.Components of aMLP MLPs are usually hospital-based alliances among hospital-based clinicians, social workers, institutions, and community legal advocates to assist patients with legal issues in need of rapid resolution, targeting patients who cannot afford legal assistance or whose situation is exigent. Community legal advocates generally workpro-bono and on behalf of the patient (they do not represent the hospital’s interests). Hospital-based MLPs can assist clinicians and patient-clients in identifying and addressing needs regarding legacy planning, guardianship for minor children, future planning documents, and financial resources. Legal advocates may be able to 1) meet patients and their families at the bedside to rapidly assess medical-legal needs, 2) go to court on behalf of the patient/family, and 3) follow up with the patient/family once they are discharged.Issues addressed by MLP consultationFinances: What is the usual source of household income and current source of household income? Has the patient/client applied for Social Security Disability? Are there arrears on rent or mortgage that will impact survivors? Does the patient-client have adequate health insurance? If not, has a Medicaid or other public assistance application been made? Any denial of benefits needing an appeal?Dependents: Are there any minor children? Is there a need for guardianship planning?Family: Any problematic legal relationships between patient and family members or domestic partners?Planning: Has the patient-client completed advance care planning documents? How are survivors to be provided for? What are the patient’s assets, life-insurance? Does the patient-client have or want a will?Tips on starting a MLPIdentify a community legal advocate. Places to start include: The Legal Services Corporation (LSC), a federally funded organization enacted by US Congress with the mission to provide high-quality civil legal advocacy to low income individuals. The LSC provides a list of all of legal advocates in all fifty states by county and/or region. The LSC web-site ishttp://www.lsc.gov .The state bar association or county bar association in your region. Many bar associations support a formal pro bono program. More information can be found at:http://www.americanbar.org/groups/bar_services/resources/state_local_bar_associations.html .Law Schools with either a public interest or health care clinic for students.A local Public Interest Law firm/group providing civil (not criminal) legal advocacy. Once an advocate is identified, discuss the type of patient/client to be served and the range of legal advocacy needed. Clarify roles, and ensure the legal advocate does not unnecessarily duplicate services already offered (e.g. by social workers). The ideal legal advocate should be willing to meet patient/clients at the bedside, work “on call” and have experience to address a range of legal needs.Financial arrangements of legal advocacy vary and include volunteer work, support from grants or direct contribution from the institution.ReferencesKlimmek R, Snow D, Wenzel J. Insurance-related and financial challenges reported by managed care enrollees with breast cancer.Clin J Oncol Nurs. 2010; 14(5):598-606.Rodabaugh K, Hammond M, Myszka D, Sandel A. A Medical-Legal Partnership as a component of a palliative care model.J Palliat Med. 2010; 13(1): 15-19Zuckerman B, Sandel M, Lawton E, Morton S. Medical-legal partnerships: transforming health care. Lancet. 2008; 37 2:1615-7.Author Affiliations: Stonybrook University Medical Center, Stony Brook, NY (LH); Suffolk Law Services Committee, Islandia, NY & Stony Brook University School of Nursing, Stony Brook, NY (DS).ACGME Competencies : systems based practice, professionalismCategory : Ethics/law/health systems
#246 Emergency Department Management of Hospice PatientsAuthors: Sangeeta Lamba MD, Tammie E Quest MD, David E Weissman MDBackground Patients enrolled in hospice programs will occasionally be transported to the Emergency Department (ED). Emergency medicine training focuses on life-prolonging measures and may fail to address hospice as a system of care. ThisFast Fact provides information for clinicians practicing in EDs on management issues when a hospice patient arrives. Fast Fact#247 discusses initiating hospice care from the ED.Why do Hospice Patients come to the ED? ED providers should never assume that arrival in the ED equates a desire for aggressive/life-prolonging treatment. Even when a patient/family requests such services, an assessment is needed to understand the concerns that prompted a shift in care goals. Frequently such requests arise from fear about the dying process or guilt about prior medical decisions to limit life-prolonging treatments. Common triggers for an ED visit include:Stress/inability to cope with impending loss of life. This may be expressed as a request to start a life-prolonging treatment previously used and discontinued (e.g. chemotherapy) or never begun (e.g. renal dialysis).Poor symptom control.Malfunction/loss of a support device such as a gastrostomy tube.Failure of the hospice program to provide timely patient support and communication.Management GuidelinesNotify hospice staff as soon as possible. Under the Medicare Hospice Benefit, hospice agencies are legally/financially responsible for the patient’s plan of care and all medical costs related to the terminal illness. SeeFast Facts #82 ,87 ,90 .Determine the trigger for the ED visit, pay attention to not only the distressing signs and symptoms but also the emotional and psycho-social issues. Involve social service and chaplaincy personnel early if needs are identified. Contact the palliative care team for consultative advice if needed.Treat distressing symptoms. SeeFast Facts for specific symptom treatment guidelines.If deterioration is imminent and rapid decisions are needed regarding the use of life-sustaining treatments (e.g. intubation for respiratory failure) a focused discussion around goals of care must occur in the ED Determine the legal decision maker if available and review any completed advance directives.Complete a rapid goals of care discussion (seeFast Facts #223 ,224 ,225 ,226 ,227 ).Make recommendations. For example, ‘According to what you want for [the patient], I would/would not recommend….’ If the patient is actively dying (seeFast Fact #3 ) assess for cultural/spiritual needs; assure privacy and endeavor to identify if there are any preferred locations a patient can be safely transferred to to die (e.g. back home; to a private hospital room).Laboratory tests/diagnostics should be limited or withheld until discussion with the patient’s hospice care team. Testing should be based on patient-defined goals of care. Generally, low burden, non-invasive methods which may reveal reversible pathology or clarify prognosis should be used first.Therapeutic modalities should be based on patient-defined goals of care rather than automatic‘ ED indications’ (e.g. antibiotics for pneumonia should only be used if they meet a patient or surrogate defined goal of care).Disposition should be plannedafter discussion with hospice staff based on the patient’s goals. Returning home or a direct admission to an inpatient hospice facility may be the best disposition rather than hospital admission. At times, hospices can arrange 24h professional support in the home for patients with difficult to manage symptoms who wish to remain home (‘continuous care’ – seeFast Fact #87 ).Notify the inpatient palliative care service if the patient is to be admitted to the hospital. Hospice agencies may revoke a patient’s enrollment in hospice care if care goals have changed, or may continue a patient under hospice care during an admission for palliation (seeFast Fact #87 ).Summary Patient-centered care for hospice patients may be enhanced by emergency clinicians who acquire skills to quickly adapt to a supportive role in the care of a terminally-ill patient. Recognizing common triggers for the ED visit, using a multi-disciplinary approach with early involvement of hospice, social services and palliative team consults may assist in providing optimal care for ED patients under hospice care.ReferencesChan GK. End-of-life and palliative care in the emergency department: a call for research, education, policy and improved practice in this frontier area. J Emerg Nurs. 2006. 32(1):101-3.Smith AK, Fisher J, Schonberg MA, et al. Am I doing the right thing? Provider perspectives on improving palliative care in the emergency department.Ann Emerg Med. 2009. 54(1):86-93.Reeves K. Hospice care in the emergency department.J Emerg Nurs. 2008. 34(4):350-1.Lamba S, Quest TE. Hospice care and the Emergency Department: rules, regulations and referrals.Ann Emerg Med. 2011; 57:282-290.Author Affiliations: University of Medicine and Dentistry of New Jersey, Newark, New Jersey (SL); Department of Veterans Affairs, Emory University School of Medicine, Atlanta, GA (TEQ); Medical College of Wisconsin, Milwaukee, WI (DEW).ACGME Competencies: Systems based practice, CommunicationKeywords: Systems/Policy, Communication
#247 Initiating a Hospice Referral from the Emergency DepartmentAuthors: Sangeeta Lamba MD, Tammie E Quest MD, David E Weissman MDBackground Patients with an end-stage illness often present to the Emergency Department (ED) with a crisis event (1). ThisFast Fact provides information for ED providers on how to refer a patient to hospice care directly from the ED (2).Fast Fact #246 suggests strategies for caring for patients receiving hospice care who present to the ED.Assess Medicare Hospice Benefit eligibility (see Fast Fact #82 ). Fundamentally, this means the patient has a prognosis that is 6 months or less if his/her disease runs its expected course, and the patient’s care goals are compatible with hospice (see #3 below). Broad guidelines for many cancer and non-cancer related conditions exist (3, 4, 5, 6). A useful starting point is to ask yourself,Would I be surprised if this patient died within the next 6 months ? For disease specific prognostic information, seeFast Facts #13 ,99 ,124 ,125 ,141 ,143 ,150 ,189 ,191 and213 .Discuss hospice as a disposition plan with the patient’s physician. Contact the patient’s personal physician: discuss the current condition, prognosis, and prior goals of care conversations. If you are considering hospice care, ask if the physician is willing to be the following physician for hospice services.Assess whether the patient‘s goals are consistent with hospice care. Generally this means a patient wants medical treatments and other support aimed at alleviating symptoms and maintaining quality of life, without life-prolongation. Patients may enroll in hospice care if theirpreeminent care goal is symptom relief, even if they are not entirely sure they want to completely discontinue life-prolonging therapies, as long as the hospice agency indicates they can accommodate those wishes. These four questions will help you get the discussion started to elicit if the patient and family are psychologically ready to accept hospice care (see alsoFast Facts #222-227).“What have you been told about the status of your illness and what the future holds?” “Has anyone talked to you about your prognosis; how much time you likely have?” “Are there plans for new treatments designed to help you extend your life?” “Has anyone discussed with you hospice services? What do you know about Hospice?” Introduce hospice to the patient and family/surrogates. Discuss the core aspects of hospice care and how these features can help the patient and family (e.g. 24/7 on-call assistance, home visits for symptom management, coordinated care with the patient’s physician, emotional and chaplaincy support).Address concerns and clarify misconceptions.Phrase your recommendation for hospice care in positive language, grounded in the patient’s own care goals. “I think the best way to help you stay at home, avoid the hospital, and stay as fit as possible for whatever time you have left is to receive hospice care at your home….” Discuss location of hospice care: usually this is the patient’s residence such as a private home or long-term care facility. Direct admissions to hospice facilities can occur depending on bed availability and ability of local hospice agencies to arrange an immediate, direct facility admission. This is not available in all communities and requires a discussion with the hospice agency.Make a referral and write orders (seeFast Fact #139). Call a hospice agency; anticipate these questions:What is the terminal illness? Who will be the following physician? (Step 2)What equipment will be needed immediately (e.g. home oxygen)? Is there a caregiver at home?Code status (patients cannot be denied hospice enrollment if ‘full code’, however the hospice team will need to know if code status needs to be addressed further.) Questions you need to ask the hospice agency include:How soon can you make an intake visit to the patient’s home? Can you visit the patient immediately, even in the ED (this is available in some communities)? How should I coordinate filling of new prescriptions I want the patient to have?Example of ED Initiated Hospice Referral Orders:Evaluate and Admit/Enroll in hospice careTerminal Diagnosis: __________.Expected Prognosis: Terminal illness with less than 6 month survival likely if disease runs its normal expected course [or more specific if indicated].Physician who will follow patient: _________.Ensure patient/surrogate understanding and secure the plan. Communicate the plan following ED discharge; provide the name and contact number for the hospice agency.What if hospice enrollment is appropriate, but cannot be arranged in a timely manner? If the patient can be cared for at home safely for 1-2 days without extra services, send her or him home with appropriate prescriptions and care instructions. In most communities, patients can be enrolled in hospice care within 24-48 hours, even on weekends. If they cannot be cared for safely at home, observation vs inpatient admission is likely necessary until a safe discharge plan can be established.Summary Patient-centered care for hospice-eligible, terminally-ill patients may be enhanced by emergency clinicians who acquire skills to make early appropriate hospice referrals from the ED.ReferencesLamba S, Quest TE. Hospice care and the emergency department: rules, regulations and referrals.Ann Emerg Med. 2011; 57:282-290.Education in Palliative and End-of-Life Care-Emergency Medicine Project, Trainers Guide. Module 5. Emanuel LL, Quest TE, eds. Chicago, IL: Northwestern University; 2008.Stuart B, et al. Medical Guidelines for determining prognosis in selected non-cancer diseases. 2nd ed. Alexandria, VA: National Hospice Organization; 1996.Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services, Medicare Coverage Database. LCD (Local Coverage Determination) for hospice: determining terminal status (L25678). Available at:http://www.cms.gov/medicare-coverage-database/details/lcd-details.aspx?LCDId=25678Gazelle G. Understanding hospice – an underutilized option for life's final chapter.New Engl J Med. 2007; 357(4):321-4.Lynn J. Perspectives on care at the close of life. Serving patients who may die soon and their families: the role of hospice and other services.JAMA . 2001; 285(7):925-32.Author Affiliations: University of Medicine and Dentistry of New Jersey, Newark, New Jersey (SL); Department of Veterans Affairs, Emory University School of Medicine, Atlanta, GA (TEQ); Medical College of Wisconsin, Milwaukee, WI (DEW).ACGME Competencies: Systems based practice, CommunicationKeywords: Systems/Policy, Communication
#248 Counseling Patients on Side Effects and Driving When Starting OpioidsAuthors: Randall E Schisler MD, Hunter Groninger MD, and Drew A Rosielle MDBackground Opioids have side effects which can limit their acceptability to patients. ThisFast Fact gives expert opinion recommendations about patient counseling when initiating opioid therapy.SeeFast Fact #83 for a discussion of patient fear of opioids, including addiction and tolerance.Key SymptomsPatients should be reassured that most opioid side effects are short-lived or otherwise manageable, and they should seek help immediately for intolerable side effects.ConstipationBackground for clinicians: Very common, reported by 23-84% of patients in various studies. It does not diminish over time, even on a steady dose. Opioids delay gastric emptying, decrease peristalsis, decrease secretions, and slow small bowel transit time.Key counseling points: Most patients need an ongoing bowel regimen involving stimulant laxatives (stool softeners such as docusate or bulking agents like fiber are ineffective), which should be used as maintenance therapy toprevent constipation, not just rescue therapy totreat it after it has developed (1).Patients should aim for an unstrained bowel movement at least every other day.“If you have not had a bowel movement in 4 days, call me for advice.”NauseaBackground for clinicians: Nausea occurs in ~25% of patients given opioids (2). There are many effective strategies to prevent and ameliorate opioid-induced nausea – seeFast Fact #25 for more details.Make sure patients have access to your anti-emetic of choice.There is no consensus as to whether anti-emetics should be givenprophylactically when initiating or increasing opioids.Key counseling points: Nausea is usually transient and resolves in several days on a stable dose (3).Patients should use their prescribed anti-emetic if nausea develops, but should contact you immediately if ineffective and/or vomiting occurs so you can prescribe alternative agents. Sedation (See also the section on driving below.) Background for clinicians: Sedation occurs in 20-60% of patients (2), usually during opioidinitiation or around the time of dose increases. Mild-to-moderate sedation usually resolves in a few days; if persistent, it may improve with drug therapy (4).Moderate-to-severe sedation responds to dose reduction, but may also necessitate opioid rotation.Key counseling points: Reassure patients that mild-to-moderate sedation usually resolves in a few days.Encourage patients to accept mild sedation (e.g. noticeable drowsiness, falling asleep unintentionally during relaxing activities such as watching TV or reading) for a few days as long as they are in a safe environment. Moderate (falling asleep during stimulating activities such as eating or having a conversation) or severe sedation should prompt a call to you immediately to discuss next steps. Less Common SymptomsPruritus is rare and does not require extensive pre-emptive counseling.“If you feel itchy it might go away after a few days. If it’s really bothering you or not going away, call me and we can make some changes.” See Fast Fact #37 .Urinary retention is rare but potentially an emergency.Counsel patients to seek medical care immediately if they lose the ability to urinate.Driving Safety There are no large, randomized studies directly examining the risk of driving while on opioids (6). Opioids can slow reaction time, cause drowsiness, or cloud judgment when they are first started or increased (7). Most experts agree that driving or operating heavy machinery is unsafe and should be avoided until a stable dose has been reached (8). Multiple smaller studies suggest that many patients on chronic opioids (defined as no dosechange within the last week) have no increased risk of motor vehicle collisions compared to the general population and no reduction in concentration or perception compared to controls(9). According to one study, which videotaped patients while actually driving, those on chronic opioid therapy versus healthy controls displayed neither a difference in driving errors in community or obstacle course driving nor in tests of attention (10).Counseling bottom line: patients who have been on a stable dose for a week, who feel no cognitive changes (drowsiness, ‘fuzziness,’ difficulties in concentrating) can drive. Forcommercial driving , the Federal Motor Carriers Safety Administration generally prohibits opioid use, but with the caveat that these rules “do not apply to the possession or use of a substance administered to a driver by or under the instructions of a licensed medical practitioner…who has advised the driver that the substance will not affect the driver's ability to safely operate a motor vehicle” (11).Individual states, employers, and insurance agencies may have further restrictions, and patients should be advised to investigate these prior to driving commercially.ReferencesMcMillan SC. Assessing and managing opiate-induced constipation in adults with cancer.Cancer Control . 2004; 11(3):3-9.Meuser T, Pietruck C, Radbruch L, Stute P, Lehmann KA, Grond S. Symptoms during cancer pain treatment following WHO-guidelines: a longitudinal follow-up study of symptom prevalence, severity and etiology.Pain . 2001; 93:247–57.Cherny N, Ripamonti C, Pereira J, et al. Strategies to manage the adverse effects of oral morphine: an evidence-based report.J Clin Oncology . 2001; 19:2542–54.Bruera E, Miller MJ, Macmillian K, Kuehn N.Neuropsychological effects of methylphenidate in patients receiving a continuous infusion of narcotics for cancer pain. Pain. 1992; 48(2):163-166.Kjellberg F, Tramer MR. Pharmacological control of opioid-induced pruritus: a quantitative systematic review of randomized trials. Eur J Anesth. 2001; 18(6):346-357.Chapman S.The effects of opioids on driving ability in patients with chronic pain.Bull Am Pain Soc. 2001; 11:1.Galski T, Williams JB, Ehle HT. Effects of opioids on driving ability.J Pain Symptom Manage . 2000; 19(3):200-8.Canadian Guideline for Safe and Effective Use of Opioids for Chronic Non-Cancer Pain . National Opioid Use Guideline Group.April 30, 2010. Available at:http://nationalpaincentre.mcmaster.ca/opioid/documents.html .Accessed June 30, 2011.Fishbain DA ,Cutler RB ,Rosomoff HL ,Rosomoff RS .Are opioid-dependent/tolerant patients impaired in driving-related skills? A structured evidence-based review.J Pain Symptom Manage 2003; 25(6):559-577.Byas-Smith MG, Chapman SL, Reed B, Cotsonis G. The effect of opioids on driving and psycho-motor performance in patients with chronic pain. Clin J Pain . 2005;.21(4):345-52.Drugs and Other Substances.US Department of Transportation Federal Motor Carrier Safety Administration Rules & Regulations.Available at:http://www.fmcsa.dot.gov/rulesregulations/administration/fmcsr/fmcsrruletext.aspx?reg=392.4 . Accessed May 11, 2011.Swegle JM, Logemann C. Management of common opiate induced adverse effects.Am Fam Physician. 2006;74(8):1347-1354.ACGME Competencies: Systems based practice, Communication, Medical knowledgeKeywords: Opiods, Ethics/Law
#249 Topical Nonsteroidal Anti-Inflammatory DrugsAuthors: Sarah Merriam MD and René Claxton MDBackground Nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs (NSAIDs) are among the most commonly prescribed drugs in the treatment of musculoskeletal pain. Two topical NSAID formulations are commercially available in the United States: diclofenac sodium gel (Voltaren) and diclofenac epolamine topical patch (Flector). ThisFast Fact reviews the pharmacology, clinical efficacy and adverse effects of topical NSAIDs for the treatment of musculoskeletal pain.Pharmacology High plasma concentrations of oral NSAIDs are required to achieve effective tissue concentrations at the site of pain and inflammation. Topical NSAIDs are believed to deliver adequate local tissue concentrations with minimal systemic absorption. Plasma concentrations following topical administration of diclofenac sodium gel and the diclofenac epolamine patch are far lower than levels found following oral administration of diclofenac (0.6%-2.2%, and less than 1%, of oral systemic levels, respectively). Time to peak serum concentration for both topical formulations is approximately 10-20 hours (1).Clinical evidence NSAIDs are often recommended as first-line treatment for mild-to-moderate musculoskeletal pain (2). A Cochrane review of the efficacy of topical NSAIDS in the treatment of acute musculoskeletal pain (sprains, strains, contusions) found that compared to placebo, the number needed to treat (NNT) was 4.5 to achieve 50% pain relief over treatment periods of 6-14 days (3). The effectiveness of topical NSAIDs for the treatment of acute low back pain or chronic conditions including chronic back pain is unknown (4). Several systematic reviews report trials of poor quality with most trial lengths lasting less than 4 weeks and demonstrating inconclusive results (5). Head-to-head trials comparing oral NSAIDs and their topical equivalents show conflicting results with regards to efficacy and there are insufficient data to perform meta-analysis (3). There are virtually no data about topical NSAID use in patient populations commonly seen in palliative care settings. A literature review in June 2011 identified a single study which showed no benefit from a topical NSAID cream over placebo in the relief of pain related to pressure ulcers (6).Adverse Effects Patients taking oral NSAIDs for ≥5 days at least twice annually have a 4.21 relative risk of gastrointestinal events compared to those who do not (7). Conversely, topical NSAIDs have a high margin of safety and have not been associated with acute renal failure or upper GI adverse events. Mild local adverse effects occur at approximately the same rate (6%) in patients treated with topical NSAIDs or topical placebo (4).Summary In the treatment of acute musculoskeletal pain, excluding low back pain, topical NSAIDS are more effective than placebo and are associated with fewer adverse events than oral NSAIDs (although this has not been demonstrated in head-to-head trials with oral NSAIDs). Current data suggest topical NSAIDs are appropriate for patients with a flare of single joint arthritis or acute musculoskeletal injury. Given the expense of topical NSAIDS (approximately $36 for one 100 gm tube of diclofenac gel and $170 for thirty diclofenac epolamine patches), unclear clinical benefit over prolonged time periods, and unknown efficacy compared to oral preparations, they are not recommended for chronic musculoskeletal pain. Their use for cancer-related pain syndromes and other indications is entirely empiric.References 1. Micromedex® Healthcare Series [Internet database]. Greenwood Village, Colo: Thomson Reuters (Healthcare) Inc. Updated periodically.Chou R, Qaseem A, Snow V, et al. Diagnosis and treatment of low back pain: a Joint Clinical Practice Guideline from the American College of Physicians and the American Pain Society.Ann Intern Med . 2007; 7:478-91. 3. Massey T, Derry S, Moore RA, McQuay HJ. Topical NSAIDs for acute pain in adults.Cochrane Database Syst Rev . 2010; 6: CD007402.4. Roelofs PD, Deyo RA, Koes BW, Scholten RJ, van Tulder MW. Nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs for low back pain: An updated Cochrane review.Spine . 2008; 33:1766-74.5. Gotzsche P. NSAIDs. Clinical Evidence. 2009; 6(1108).6. Prentice WM, Roth LJ, Kelly P. Topical benzydamine cream and the relief of pressure pain.Palliat Med. 2004; 18:520-4.7. Singh G, Triadafilopoulus G. Epidemiology of NSAID-induced GI complications.J Rheumatol. 1999; 26:18-24.Authors' Affiliation: University of Pittsburgh Medical Center, Pittsburgh, PA.
#250 Tracheostomy Care Elliott Kozin MD, Joseph Straton MD, and Jennifer Kapo MD Background Many patients with advanced illness have tracheostomies, which require careful observation and specialized management. Common indications for tracheostomies in patients being seen in palliative care and hospice settings include chronic long-term ventilation, aid with ventilation weaning, and upper airway obstruction (from, for instance, head and neck cancer). A working knowledge of the basic tracheostomy equipment and handling procedures can avoid complications and improve a patient's comfort.Tracheostomy Equipment 101 At its most basic level, a tracheostomy appliance consists of a cannula (or tube), cuff, obturator, and ties. The cannula maintains the patency of the stoma and airway, and it facilitates movement of air into the trachea. Tracheostomy cannulas can be cuffed or uncuffed. The inflatable cuff, typically filled with air by a syringe, surrounds a portion of the cannula inside the trachea. The inflated cuff occludes the trachea around the cannula, which allows for increased protection against aspiration and also for greater degrees of positive pressure ventilation. Cuffs require monitoring to maintain a pressure of 20-25 mmHg. Higher pressures can produce tracheal ischemia, mucosal injury, and difficulty swallowing; lower pressures can potentially aggravate aspiration around the cannula (1,2,3). Obturators, usually packaged with new tracheostomy tubes, are inserted into the lumen of the cannula and provide for increased rigidity during placement of the tracheostomy tube. Tracheostomy ties secure the tracheostomy tube to the patient and typically wrap around the back of the patient's neck.Complications of Tracheostomy Placement Short-term complications include bleeding from surgical site (~5%), wound infection, subcutaneous emphysema, pneumothorax, tracheostomy tube obstruction, recurrent laryngeal nerve damage, and posterior tracheal wall injury (4, 5).Long-term complications include dysphagia, airway obstruction from secretions, infection, rupture of the innominate artery, tracheo-innominate artery fistula ( <0.7%), tracheosophageal fistula, tracheal dilation, tracheal stenosis (1-2%), granuloma formation, and tracheal ischemia and necrosis (4, 5).Approach to Complications and EmergenciesAcute Dyspnea. If a patient with a tracheostomy becomes acutely dyspneic, it may be due to partial or complete blockage by retained secretions. Ask the patient to cough and then attempt to suction the tracheostomy in place with a flexible suction catheter. If the tracheostomy stoma and tract is not fully matured, do not attempt to remove the cannula as it may be difficult to re-insert. (3)Bleeding. Bleeding from the surgical site is among the most common early complications. Treatments include packing around the edges of the stoma with gauze, correction of coagulopathies, and cautery or suturing of site of bleeding (3,5). Massive pulsatile bleeding may indicate erosion of the innominate artery, which can occur days to weeks after a tracheostomy procedure. This can rapidly lead to airway compromise and/or exsanguination. To minimize bleeding, place a gloved finger in the stoma, feel for a pulsatile mass, and apply forward motion on the backside of the upper border of the sternum thereby compressing the pulsatile artery against the posterior surface of the sternum (6). Other techniques include overinflating the cuff. If the patient's goals of care allow this, the patient should be transported emergently to the operating room for management (3). SeeFast Fact #251for further details about caring for hemorrhaging patients who do not want further invasive treatments.Accidental Decannulation. Don't panic. Reassure the patient. If the tube has been in place less than 5 days, consider endotracheal intubation if a tracheostomy tract cannot be immediately re-established (5). If tube has been in place for 5-10 days, the tract should be well formed and should not suddenly close (2). To reinsert the tracheostomy tube, insert the obturator (if applicable) into the cannula. Slowly insert the cannula with obturator into the tracheostomy, following the path of the airway. When reinserting, be mindful of any resistance. If met with resistance, it is possible to create a false passage, and one should reevaluate the entry approach. After insertion, remove the obturator while keeping the cannula in place. Listen for and feel for air movement through the tracheostomy tube and ensure that there is no subcutaneous emphysema, which may be indicative of improper placement. If you cannot insert a new cannula and the patient cannot breathe comfortably on their own through the stoma, use a bag-valve mask to ventilate the patient through the upper airway. Ventilate gently to prevent air from escaping through the stoma or carefully occlude the stoma with a gloved hand to maximize oxygenation. Next steps depend on the patient's current indication for a tracheostomy (airway patency vs. ventilation vs. secretion management) and goals of care. If the patient has a patent airway and is not on a ventilator there may be time to have the patient evaluated by a specialist to replace the cannula. If the patient is ventilator dependent or has an upper airway obstruction, endotracheal intubation and/or emergency transport is indicated. Resuscitation via Tracheostomy Tube . Treat the patient like patients without tracheostomy, with the following exceptions. Do not remove the tracheostomy. Check that the cannula is patent. Ventilate by using a manual resuscitation bag attached directly to tracheostomy tube. If unable to ventilate, try suctioning. If still unable to ventilate, try to change tracheostomy tube. The last resort is oral intubation. Conclusion Careful discussions with dying patients and their families about options and preferences if there are tracheostomy complications can help prevent chaotic, emergency decisions about urgent transportation, surgeries, or oral intubation.References Heffner JE, Hess D. Tracheostomy management in the chronically ventilated patient.Clin Chest Med. 2001; 22:55-69. Hess DR. Tracheostomy tubes and related appliances.Respir Care. 2005; 50:497-510. St. John RE and Malen JF. Contemporary issues in adult tracheostomy management.Crit Care Nurs Clin N Am. 2004; 16:413-430. Conlan AA, Kopec, SE. Tracheostomy in the ICU.J Int Care Med . 2000; 15:1-13. De Leyn P, Bedert L, Delcroix M, et al. Review. Tracheotomy: clinical review and guidelines.Eu J Cardiothoracic Surg . 2007; 32:412-21. ACGME Competency: Patient care, Medical knowledgeKeyword: Cancer
#251 Carotid Blowout Management Authors: Elliott Kozin MD, Jennifer Kapo MD, Joseph Straton MD, and Drew A Rosielle MDBackground Carotid blowout is the rupture of the extracranial carotid arteries or their major branches. It is an uncommon but devastating complication of head and neck cancer. Predisposing factors include prior radiation therapy, extensive surgery, wound breakdown, local infection, tumor recurrence, and pharyngocutaneous fistulae. ThisFast Fact will discuss the approach to patients with carotid blowout, including patients near the end of life whose care goals are focused on safety and comfort.Diagnosis The 'carotid blowout syndrome' (CBS) ranges from asymptomatic exposure of a carotid artery to acute hemorrhage. CBS is described asthreatened (evidence on physical and radiologic examinations suggestive of inevitable hemorrhage if no immediate action is taken, such as an exposed artery);impending (episode of transcervical or transoral hemorrhage or 'sentinel bleeding,' typically caused by a pseudoaneurysm, that either resolves spontaneously or with packing/pressure); oracute (hemorrhage that cannot be stopped by packing or pressure). The gold standard for diagnosing CBS is angiography, and it is the preferred diagnostic modality because of its potential therapeutic capabilities (endovascular stenting, for instance, canoccur during the same procedure) (5). Diagnostic angiography has an overall 8.5% complication rate, including a 2.6% rate of neurologic complications such as stroke (7). Computed tomographic and magnetic resonance angiography can also be helpful in identifying and characterizingthreatened lesions (6).Management Prior to the era of endovascular intervention, treatment for CBS was surgical ligation of the bleeding artery causing high morbidity (stroke) and mortality (5). A newer technique, endovascular stenting is associated with far fewer immediate complications (6, 7). Threatened CBS. Early endovascular stenting is indicated, before frank hemorrhage occurs.Impending/Acute CBS. The optimal management requires quick recognition and often advanced trauma life-support. Initial management should consist of resuscitation and stabilization of the patient, including control of the airway, control of bleeding with pressure, and fluid resuscitation. Placing multiple dressings over the bleeding site is inadequate and inappropriate. It is best to place a gloved finger over the site of hemorrhage, applyingfocused pressure , to temporarily control the bleeding until definitive treatment is undertaken (6). Stabilization allows for accurate diagnostic angiography and subsequent endovascular treatment. If interventional radiology therapies are unavailable or unsuccessful, emergent surgical intervention is indicated. Approach to the Patient at the End-of-Life All the above interventions may be appropriate depending on the patient's goals and prognosis. However, patients near the end-of-life may want medical care solely focused on symptom alleviation without life-prolongation. If CBS is thought to be likely for a dying patient, careful discussion with the patient/family, in collaboration with surgery and radiology, about the patient's goals and preferences, is critical. For instance, preventative arterial stenting may be acceptable to an ambulatory patient receiving hospice care, whereas emergency transport and interventions may be unacceptable and unlikely to substantially improve a patient's quality or length of life if that patient is already bed-bound and in the final days/weeks of her or his life.For dying patients at high-risk of bleeding professional and family caregiver preparation is important to minimize panic and distress from copious amounts of blood, and to ensure patient comfort during bleeding. There is no consensus about how to best identify patients for deliberate education and emergency planning, as for some patients this may unnecessarily worry them. At minimum, patients who have had a sentinel bleed should have a plan (10). An emergency care plan should include the following elements:Ready availability ofdark colored linens/towels to cover and absorb blood (less distressing than seeing bright red blood on white linens);gloves, face/eye protection (in case of brisk arterial spraying), and otheruniversal precautions .Suctioning equipment for clearing the mouth or tracheostomy of blood is desirable, if available.Symptom drugs and explicit instructions on how to use them. For brisk bleeding, rapid patient sedation is indicated to palliate fear, dyspnea, and suffocation. Drug and route choice will depend on patient location (home vs. hospital vs. inpatient hospice) and intravenous access, but when available the approach is similar to providing continuous, deep sedation (seeFast Facts #106, 107). Much published expert opinion recommends doses in the range of 5-10 mg of midazolam subcutaneously initially (see Reference 10 for a complete discussion of published drug dosing practices). Opioids for pain and dyspnea are also indicated. For massive hemorrhages, there may not even be time to administer comfort meds prior to patients losing consciousness.A plan for whom to call, and whether and where to transport the patient, if at home. References Maran AGD, et al. Radical neck dissection: a 19-year experience.J Laryngol Otol. 1989; 103:760-4. Citardi MJ, et al. Management of carotid artery rupture by monitored endovascular therapeutic occlusion (1988-1994).Laryngoscope. 1995; 105:1086-92. Mazumdar A, et al. Update on endovascular management of the carotid blowout syndrome.Neuroimag Clin N Am. 2009; 19:271-81. Change FC, et al. Patients with head and neck cancers associated postirradiated carotid blowout syndrome: endovascular therapeutic methods and outcomes.J Vasc Surg. 2008; 47:936-45. Cohen J, et al. Contemporary management of carotid blowout.Curr Opinion Otolaryngol Head Neck Surg. 2004; 2:110-15. Powitzky R, et al. Carotid blowout in patients with head and neck cancer.Ann Ot Rhin Laryng. 2010; 119(7):476-84. Morrissey DD, et al. Endovascular management of hemorrhage in patients with head and neck cancer.Arch Otolaryngol Head Neck Surg. 1997; 123:15-9. Lesley WS, et al. Preliminary experience with endovascular reconstruction for the management of carotid blowout syndrome.AJNR Am J Neuroradiol. 2003; 24:975-81. Broomfield SJ, et al. Endovascular management of the carotid blowout syndrome.J Laryng and Otol. 2006; 120:694-97. Harris DG, Noble SI. Management of terminal hemorrhage in patients with advanced cancer: a systematic literature review.J Pain Sympt Manage. 2009; 38:913-27. Authors' Affiliations: University of Pennsylvania School of Medicine, Philadelphia, PA (EK, JK, JS); University of Minnesota Medical School and Fairview Health Services, Minneapolis, MN (DAR).ACGME Competencies: Patient care, CommunicationKeywords: Cancer
#252 Borderline Personality Disorder in Palliative CareAuthors: Laura McLafferty MD and Julie W Childers MDBackground Borderline personality disorder (BPD) is identified by a pervasive pattern of instability of relationships, self-image, and mood, as well as marked impulsivity (1). The prevalence of BPD in the general population is 1-2%, and, despite the impression of a female predominance, evidence indicates that it occurs equally frequently in men and women (2). The stresses of serious illness may bring out these patients’ most dysfunctional coping strategies, which can be uniquely challenging for medical professionals.  ThisFast Fact provides strategies for successful interactions with patients and patients’ caregivers with BPD.Diagnosing BPD The diagnosis of BPD requires a skilled clinical interview conducted by a knowledgeable examiner who has a longitudinal view of the affected patient. In the palliative care setting, certain behaviors and interactions with other individuals are clues to a BPD diagnosis if not previously established.Individuals with BPD evoke strong emotional feelings in clinicians, including both negative emotions (anger, disgust, frustration, and anxiety) and over-identification, which may lead to attempts to “rescue” the patient.Individuals with BPD are unable to sustain ambivalent feelings and may label clinicians as either “wonderful” or “terrible”, a defense mechanism known as “splitting”.Individuals with BPD will go to great lengths to avoid real or imagined abandonment. They may demand multiple provider visits per day and become angry or withdrawn when demands for extra attention or special exceptions are not met. They are more likely to threaten legal action against providers when they perceive that their needs have not been met.Impulsive behavior, including inappropriate use of prescribed medications, signing out against medical advice, and inconsistency in decision-making, occur commonly.Defects in cognitive functioning, especially decision making, conflict resolution, and “effortful control” (the ability to inhibit or activate behavior to adapt to a situation) affect the ability to make reasoned decisions about medical care and sustain meaningful interactions with loved ones and medical staff.Strategies for working individuals with BPD (4, 5, 6, 9)Remember that the individual with BPD is suffering. Monitor your own feelings and refrain from responding emotionally or aggressively to verbal attacks and manipulation (SeeFast Facts #59, 172 and 203).Begin encounters with a tactful assessment and acknowledgment of the individual’s distress, and focus on specific problems. Address problem behaviors directly with statements such as “We want to continue to treat you, but if you threaten to hurt other people we will have to have you escorted out of the clinic”.Recognize splitting behavior (when clinicians find themselves exuberantly praised or labeled as the ‘only one who has ever been helpful’ to the patient). Clinicians should avoid excessive familiarity and should instead identify themselves as part of a unified treatment team with a common plan.Set explicit limits on disruptive behavior such as angry outbursts or harm to self or property. A written treatment contract which specifies consequences may be helpful. Expect the individual to test the limits and be prepared to respond consistently.Clinician Self Care and Use of the Interdisciplinary TeamFrequent debriefing with the interdisciplinary team and key clinicians (e.g., other consultants) where you have an opportunity to share the feelings you experience in working with a BPD patients is essential for practitioner self-care (SeeFast Facts #167-170).Involve the treatment team in setting limits on behaviors (e.g., angry outbursts), visit frequency, and inappropriate use of medications. Carefully document all interactions with the patient or family member, including specific behaviors.Utilize consultants. A psychiatric consult-liaison service or the patient’s own psychiatrist or psychologist, if the patient has one, should be involved in developing a plan for successful interaction the individual. If a patient’s prognosis is long enough, consider requiring participation in psychological or psychiatric care as a condition of your continued involvement.ReferencesDiagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders . 4th Ed, Text Revision. Arlington, VA: American Psychiatric Association, 2000.Oldham, JM. Guideline watch: practice guideline for the treatment of patients with borderline personality disorder. American Psychiatric Association Practice Guidelines, 2005. Available at:http://focus.psychiatryonline.org/content.aspx?bookid=28&sectionid=1682658 . Accessed December 15, 2011. DOI: 10.1176/appi.books.9780890423363.148718.Presniak MD, Olson TR, MacGregor MW. The role of defense mechanisms in borderline and antisocial personalities.J Pers Assess. 2010; 92:137-145.Leichter SB, Dreelin E. Borderline personality disorder and diabetes: a potentially ominous mix.Clin Diabetes . 2005; 23(3):101-103.Meyer F,Block S . Personality disorders in the oncology setting. J Support Oncol. 2011; 9(2):44-51.Saper JR, Lake AE. Borderline personality disorder and the chronic headache patient: review and management recommendations.Headache. 2002; 42(7):663-674.Haas LJ, Leiser JP, Magill MK, Sanyer ON. Management of the difficult patient.Am Fam Phys. 2005; 72:2063-2068.Ward, RK. Assessment and management of personality disorders.Am Fam Phys. 2004; 70:1505-1512.Hay JL, Passik SD. The cancer patient with borderline personality disorder: suggestions for symptom-focused management in the medical setting.Psychooncol. 2000; 9(2):91-100.Author Affiliations: University of Pittsburgh Medical Center, Pittsburgh, PA.ACGME Competencies: Communication, Systems Based Practice
#253 Palliative Care Consultation in the ICUAuthors: Margaret L Campbell PhD, RN, David E Weissman MD, and Judy E Nelson MD, JDBackground The Intensive Care Unit (ICU) is the setting for high-intensity health care designed to resolve life-threatening illnesses and extend life. However, risks of mortality and severe morbidity remain high and virtually all ICU patients have palliative care needs. Integration of palliative care services into ICU care is increasingly seen as a method to improve clinical care (1,10). ThisFast Fact reviews the role of palliative care consultations in the ICU along with options for more generalist palliative care services provided by ICU clinicians.What occurs in an ICU Palliative Care ConsultationAssess/treat distressing physical, psychological, and spiritual symptoms/problems.Communicate information about prognosis and treatment options to patient/family in concert with ICU, primary care and subspecialty colleagues.Establish/clarify goals of care that are realistic and appropriate in relation to the patient’s condition, values and preferences, and help match treatments to these goals.Formulate a transition care plan that accounts for prognosis, goals of care and patient/family needs.Provide support for the families.Support the ICU medical team in making clinically, ethically, and emotionally challenging decisions.Research Data on Benefits of Palliative Care ICU ConsultationEarly identification of a dying trajectory leading to decreased time to institution of patient- and family-centered, comfort-focused treatment goals (2-3).Movement of appropriate patients to lower intensity care sites (ward, palliative care unit, home hospice) (5-6).Reduction in ICU length of stay for adult patients (2-4, 7).Reduction in the cost of care, without an increase in mortality, due to early establishment of realistic treatment goals leading to reduction in use of high-cost ICU resources/interventions (2-4, 7-8).Support for staff in challenging and emotionally draining/morally distressing patient/family care situations.Palliative Care consultation for hospitalized patients can reduce the need for ICU admission through establishment of treatment goals that preclude future ICU admission (7-8).Continuity of care when the patient transitions from the ICU to ward or palliative care unit as the Palliative Care team follows the patient.ICU/Palliative Care Collaboration A range of options exist for integrating palliative care services into the ICU. At one extreme, ICU staff consult a palliative care specialist team for problems the ICU staff deems appropriate for consultative advice on an ad hoc basis. At the other extreme, the ICU embeds systems in place to provide ICU-led generalist palliative care services to all ICU patients, utilizing palliative care specialists for complex problems. Embedding systems that ensure the needs of all patients are met includes screening all patients on admission and daily for unmet palliative care needs, early identification of a surrogate, timely symptom management, and routinely-scheduled family meetings to discuss goals of care (1,9,10). Quality outcomes related to patient and family experience and to health care utilization should be tracked within the framework of available resources (1,11).When to use Specialist Palliative Care Services Consultations can either be initiated on a case-by-case basis by ICU or other primary clinicians, or triggered proactively using a system to identify patients at high-risk for unmet needs (2-4). Key indications for consultation include:Difficult-to-control physical symptoms despite usual treatment approaches.Patients/surrogates wish to explore non-ICU supportive care options such as hospice services.Staff have questions about the appropriateness of life-sustaining therapies in the setting of advanced complex illnesses.There are complex family dynamics impacting decisions about use of life-sustaining treatments.There are disagreements among staff or between staff and patients/surrogates about prognosis and/or use of life-sustaining treatments.Patients are being readmitted to the ICU more frequently within a given time frame.Summary Specialist palliative care consultations, together with integration of palliative care principles into the care of all ICU patients, can improve the patient/family experience, reduce length of stay and improve ICU throughput without increasing mortality, and lower health care costs.Additional resources: ICU Screening tools/policies. Center to Advance Palliative Care. Available at the IPAL-ICU project site:http://www.capc.org/ipal-icu/improvement-and-clinical-tools/ .ReferencesNelson JE, Mulkerin CM, Adams LL, Pronovost PJ. Improving comfort and communication in the ICU: a practical new tool for palliative care performance measurement and feedback.Qual Saf Health Care. 2006; 15(4):264-271.Campbell ML, Guzman JA. Impact of a proactive approach to improve end-of-life care in a medical ICU.Chest. 2003; 123(1):266-271.Campbell ML, Guzman JA. A proactive approach to improve end-of-life care in a medical intensive care unit for patients with terminal dementia.Crit Care Med. 2004; 32(9):1839-1843.Norton SA, Hogan LA, Holloway RG, Temkin-Greener H, Buckley MJ, Quill TE. Proactive palliative care in the medical intensive care unit: effects on length of stay for selected high-risk patients.Crit Care Med. 2007; 35(6):1530-1535.Carlson RW, Devich L, Frank RR. Development of a comprehensive supportive care team for the hopelessly ill on a university medical service.JAMA. 1988; 259(3):378-383.Smith TJ, Coyne P, Cassel B, Penberthy L, Hopson A, Hager MA. A high-volume specialist palliative care unit and team may reduce in-hospital end-of-life care costs.J Palliat Med. 2003; 6(5):699-705.Morrison RS, Dietrich J, Ladwig S, et al. Palliative care consultation teams cut hospital costs for Medicaid beneficiaries.Health Aff (Millwood). 2011; 30(3):454-463.Penrod JD, Deb P, Luhrs C, et al. Cost and utilization outcomes of patients receiving hospital-based palliative care consultation.J Palliat Med. 2006; 9(4):855-860.Weissman DE, Meier DE. Identifying patients in need of palliative care assessment in the hospital setting: consensus recommendations.J Palliat Med. 2011; 14(1):1-7.Nelson JE, Bassett R, Boss RD, et al. Models for structuring a clinical initiative to enhance palliative care in the intensive care unit: a report from the IPAL-ICU Project (Improving Palliative Care in the ICU).Crit Care Med. 2010; 38(9):1765-1772.Nelson JE, Brasel KJ, Campbell ML, et al. Evaluation of ICU Palliative Care Quality: A technical assistance monograph from the IPAL-ICU Project. Available at:http://www.capc.org/ipal/ . Accessed February 22, 2012.Authors’ Affiliations: College of Nursing, Wayne State University, Detroit, MI (MLC); Medical College of Wisconsin, Milwaukee, WI (DEW); Mount Sinai School of Medicine, New York, NY (JEN).
#254 Complicated Grief 2nd edAuthors: René Claxton MD and Charles F Reynolds III, MDBackground The majority of individuals experience normal grief after the death of a loved one (seeFast Fact #32). However, about 10-20% of bereaved individuals experience a persistent, debilitating phenomenon referred to as complicated grief (CG) (1). Complicated grief has also been referred to as prolonged, traumatic or pathologic grief (2).Risk Factors CG is principally considered an attachment disorder (1). Insecure attachment styles (excessive dependency, compulsive care-giving, defensive separation) are correlated with CG. Additionally, supportive marital relationships (characterized as security-enhancing, confiding and emotionally supportive) are correlated with CG after the loss of a spouse suggesting that the loss of a spouse who provides emotional stability and security may lead to an exacerbated grief reaction (3). Other risk factors include weak parental bonding in childhood, childhood abuse and neglect, female gender, low perceived social support, and low preparation for the loss (1, 4).Impact on Health CG is associated with mental and physical health problems including depression, hypertension, work and social impairment and reduced quality of life. Additionally, CG increases an individual’s risk of suicide and suicidal behavior (6).Diagnosis CG shares characteristics with major depressive disorder (suicidal ideation, preoccupation with worthlessness) and post-traumatic stress disorder (re-experiencing intrusive thoughts of the deceased, avoidance of reminders of the deceased and emotional numbness). However these are separate entities differentiated by precipitating events, risk factors, course of illness and response to intervention (2). The precise diagnostic criteria for CG are currently being debated (4). Commonly agreed upon characteristics include:yearning, pining, or longing for the deceasedtrouble accepting the deathfeeling uneasy about moving on with one’s lifeinability to trust others since the deathexcessive bitterness or anger about the deathpersistent feeling of being shocked, stunned, or emotionally numb since the deathfrequent intense feelings of lonelinessfeeling that life is empty or meaningless without the deceased (refraining from doing things/going places that remind one of the loss)frequent preoccupying thoughts about the person that died Symptoms must cause marked dysfunction in social, occupational or other important domains. The duration of symptoms required to meet criteria for CG has not been defined and varies between six to twelve months after the death (1, 4).Screening The following Brief Grief Questionnaire is a 5-item screening tool scored on a 0-2 Likert scale (‘not at all,’ ‘somewhat,’ ‘a lot’) which has been used to screen for CG (5).How much of the time are you having trouble accepting the death of a loved one?How much does your grief interfere with your life?How much are you having images or thoughts of your loved one when he or she died or other thoughts about the death that really bother you?Are there things that you used to do when your loved one was alive that you don’t feel comfortable doing more, that you avoid? How much are you avoiding these things?How much are you feeling cut off or distant from other people since your loved one died, even people you used to be close to, like family or friends? Expert recommendation is that individuals with scores of ≥5 should undergo a diagnostic evaluation by a mental health professional (6).Treatment A recent meta-analysis on the treatment of CG showed efficacy of interventions including cognitive-behavioral and group therapy in alleviating symptoms with a duration of benefit from 3-6 months. Limitations of the meta-analysis include under-representation of men (average 71% female), small number of studies included (n=5), and small number of participants (n=485, 109 lost to follow up) (7). There have been no randomized controlled trials evaluating the pharmacologic treatment of CG and there is currently no defined role for drug therapy. A randomized trial is currently underway to evaluate the effect of a selective serotonin reuptake inhibitor on CG. Many hospice agencies provide bereavement services, even if the bereaved’s loved one was not a patient of the hospice agency.Bottom Line Most bereaved individuals experience normal grief. A minority will experience long-term, persistent, disruptive symptoms that impair functioning and increase the risk for negative mental and physical health states. Individuals suffering from CG benefit from referral to a trained mental health provider who can administer therapy specific to CG. ReferencesZhang B, et al. Update on bereavement research: evidence-based guidelines for the diagnosis and treatment of complicated bereavement. J Pall Med. 2006; 9:1188-1203.Lichtenthal WG, et al. A case for establishing complicated grief as a distinct mental disorder in DSM-V. Clin Psych Rev. 2004; 24:637-662.Van Doorn C, et al. The influence of marital quality and attachment styles on traumatic grief and depressive symptoms. J Nerv Ment Dis. 1998; 186:566-573.Shear KM, et al. Complicated grief and related bereavement issues for DSM-5. Depress Anxiety. 2001; 28:103-117.Shear KM, et al. Screening for complicated grief among project liberty service recipients 18 months after September 11, 2001. Psychiatric Services. 2006; 57:1291-7.Reynolds C, et al. Healing Emotions After Loss (HEAL): Diagnosis and Treatment of Complicated Grief. UPMC Synergies. Spring 2011. Available at:http://healstudy.org/wp-content/uploads/2010/10/S270-Synergies_GR_Spring_2011.htm . Accessed March 22, 2012.Wittouck C, et al. The prevention and treatment of complicated grief: a meta-analysis. Clin Psych Rev. 2011; 31:69-78. Authors’ Affiliation: University of Pittsburgh Medical Center, Pittsburgh, PA. ACGME Competencies : Medical knowledge, Patient care
#255 Topical Capsaicin for Neuropathic PainAuthors: Hunter Groninger MD and Randall E Schisler MDBackground Derived fromCapsicum chili peppers, capsaicin has been used as a topical analgesic for centuries. Available in both over-the-counter and prescription strengths, capsaicin preparations have been studied and utilized for management of neuropathic pain. ThisFast Fact reviews use of capsaicin for topical neuropathic analgesia, including the new 8% single-dose capsaicin patch (‘Qutenza’).Mechanism of Action Capsaicin is a highly selective agonist for TRPV1 receptors expressed in afferent neuronal C fibers and some Aδ fibers. Local activation of TRPV1 receptors by heat, pH changes, or endogenous lipids normally leads to nerve depolarization propagated to spinal cord and brain, causing local heat, stinging, and/or itching sensations. Through intracellular enzymatic, cytoskeletal, and osmotic changes, prolonged activation of TRPV1 by capsaicin results in loss of receptor functionality, causing impaired local nociception for extended periods. At higher concentrations, topical capsaicin appears to promote temporary neurolysis, with re-innervation occurring weeks after cessation of drug therapy (1,2). Capsaicin-induced local depletion of substance P was previously thought to be its mechanism for pain relief. However, this is no longer considered to be the case (1).Indications Topical capsaicin has shown analgesic benefits in post-herpetic neuralgia, painful polyneuropathies including diabetic and HIV-related neuropathy, and postmastectomy/surgical neuropathic syndromes (3). The capsaicin 8% patch is FDA-approved for post-herpetic neuralgia. Its efficacy in other neuropathies is still being investigated. Generally, these painful areas should involve a discrete area of the body such as a distal extremity or surgical scar. There is no well-defined limit to the body surface area which can be treated with capsaicin cream. The 14 x 20cm capsaicin 8% patch is approved for application of up to 4 patches at a time. Capsaicin creams have been used in children; there are no data about use of the 8% patch.Clinical Use Capsaicin is commercially available as 0.025%, 0.075%, and 0.1% creams. Creams are applied by patients or caregivers 3-4 times per day. The duration of treatment with the cream is empiric. A single-application high-dose capsaicin 8% patch is available. The patch is placed on the skin for 60 minutes by a medical professional in a clinic, then removed. Because the patch application itself is painful, the area is pretreated with lidocaine cream, and residual capsaicin is cleaned afterwards with a special cleansing product. Up to 4 patches may be applied at one time, and repeated as often as every 3 months (4).Effectiveness In a recent systematic review, capsaicin 0.075% cream demonstrated statistically significant benefit in post-herpetic neuralgia, post-surgical neuropathies, and diabetic neuropathy, compared to placebo (3). The analgesic effect of capsaicin 0.075% cream has been demonstrated throughout 4-12 weeks of study follow-up, although it may take weeks of application to achieve significant benefit. Although studies demonstrate its effectiveness in musculoskeletal pain, capsaicin 0.025% cream has not been adequately studied for neuropathic pain. The efficacy of the single high-dose capsaicin 8% patch has been observed up to 12 weeks in published data (5). It is effective for post-herpetic neuralgia, however there have been mixed results with the patch for HIV-related neuropathy. To date, no head-to-head trials have compared the capsaicin 8% patch to capsaicin 0.075% cream.Toxicity and Precautions Capsaicin should not be used on open wounds. Major side effects are localized and include erythema and uncomfortable burning, stinging, or itching. Over repeated applications, these burning/stinging sensations decrease, corresponding with progressive neuronal defunctionalization. Inhalation of capsaicin can cause nasopharyngeal or respiratory irritation, sneezing, and tearing. Patients are advised to use gloves while applying the cream, avoid contact with eyes and mucous membranes, and wash hands after application. Transient hypertension associated with increased local pain has been noted. Cessation of capsaicin use due to side effects appears more common with repeated low dose cream application (15% of patients) compared to the patch (1% of patients in a clinical trial setting) (5).Cost Capsaicin 0.025%, 0.075%, 0.1% creams are available over-the-counter (approximately $8/oz). One capsaicin 8% patch costs approximately $800 (plus clinician fees for application). Costs for 3-month supplies of relevant neuropathic pain medications are: ~$700 for lidocaine 5% patches, 1 a day; ~$900 for pregabalin 100 mg 3 times a day; ~$300 for gabapentin 600 mg 3 times a day; ~$50 for amitriptyline 100 mg once daily (6).ReferencesAnand P, Bley K. Topical capsaicin for pain management: therapeutic potential and mechanisms of action of the new high concentration capsaicin 8% patch.Br J Anaesthesia . 2011; 107(4):490–502.Jones VM, Moore KA, Peterson DM. Capsaicin 8% topical patch: a review of the evidence.J Pain Palliat Pharmacotherapy . 2011; 25:32-41.Jorge LL, Feres CC, Teles VEP. Topical preparations for pain relief: efficacy and patient adherence.J Pain Research . 2011; 4:11-24.Detailed instructions for patch application are available in the official Prescribing Information document. Available athttp://www.qutenza.com/_docs/qutenza_full_PI_.htm . Accessed February 16, 2012.Derry S, Lloyd R, Moore RA, McQuay HJ. Topical capsaicin for chronic neuropathic pain in adults.Cochrane Database Syst Rev . 2009; 4:CD007393.Prices from:Drugstore.com Online Pharmacy. Available at: http://drugstore.com. Accessed: 27 Sept. 2011. Authors’ Affiliations: Clinical Center, National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, MD (HG); Carolinas Medical Center/Northeast, Concord, NC (RES).Conflicts of Interest Statement: The authors have disclosed no relevant conflicts of interest.
#256 Fever Near the End of LifeAuthors: Mallory Strickland BS and Erica Stovsky MDIntroduction: Clinically significant fever is defined as an increase in body temperature (generally > 38.5°C) in conjunction with an elevation of the hypothalamic set point. Hyperthermia is an uncontrolled elevation in body temperature without a change in the thermoregulatory center. ThisFast Fact reviews the key elements in assessment and treatment of fever in patients near the end-of-life.Pathophysiology:Fever is mediated by exogenous pyrogens (microbes or their products) and pyrogenic cytokines (i.e. IL-1,IL-6, IFN a, TNF) which induce the synthesis of prostaglandin E2 (PGE2). Centrally, PGE2 increases production of cAMP, which raises the hypothalamic set point to febrile levels. Peripherally, this induces myalgias and arthralgias. Pyrogens/pyrogenic cytokines are produced by infection, inflammation, trauma/tissue necrosis, and tumors. Drugs can induce fever through various metabolic and immune responses as well as by mimicking endogenous pyrogens, inflicting direct tissue damage and interfering with heat loss. Common drugs in palliative care settings which cause fever include antibiotics, anti-psychotics (neuroleptic malignant syndrome) and opioid withdrawal. Fever associated with brain injuries is common, perhaps due to direct hypothalamic injury.Assessment:The extent of evaluation will depend on the patient’s condition and overall goals of care. When indicated, a thorough history and physical exam is needed, looking for a) signs of infection, b) in cancer patients, evidence of disease progression, and c) a medication review. A typical infection laboratory and radiographic workup can be pursued if it will affect management. Common etiologies and clinical findings are reviewed below.Infection : look for a history of exposure (e.g. influenza), normal barrier violation (e.g. aspiration, skin ulcer), and neutropenia (for instance, if receiving chemotherapy). Associated signs/symptoms include elevated WBC, chills, spiking temperatures, and if severe, hypotension, tachycardia, mental status changes and neutropenia.Note: Newborns, the elderly, patients with chronic hepatic or renal failure, the immunocompromised, and those taking glucocorticoids can have serious infections without a fever.Neoplastic Fever : a diagnosis of exclusion. It is uncommon in solid tumors, more common in lymphomas. It is less likely to manifest as chills, hypotension, tachycardia, and mental status changes; however elevated ESR and CRP are common. It tends to be responsive to NSAIDs.Medication-Induced : there is no predictable time of onset from medication initiation to fever presentation. It resolves when suspected drug is stopped.DVT/PE : thought to cause fever through inflammation. Fever is inconsistently associated with DVT/PE in the literature, however these are common events in the end-of-life population.Treatment: Benefits and burdens of all therapeutic options should be weighed in the context of the patient’s overall clinical picture, including whether a fever is actually distressing to a dying patient. When decidingif to treat the fever, ask patients who can communicate if the fever is uncomfortable, and whether or not breaking the fever is more uncomfortable than the fever itself. Although empiric, there is no compelling reason to think that treatment of fever actually reduces suffering for dying, unresponsive patients.Education andreassurance for family and other caregivers is most important in those situations.Non-pharmacological InterventionsCooling blankets, ice packs, sponging, and fans. While these can bring down body temperature, they are noisy, labor-intensive, and distract family and other caregivers from more meaningful interactions at the death-bed. Pharmacologic InterventionsDiscontinue any non-essential drugs if drug-induced fever is suspected.Antipyretics all work by inhibiting production of PGE2. Acetaminophen 650-1000mg* PO/PR/IV q4-6 hours PRN (maximum dose 1 g/6h and 4 g/day*) is considered first line given its low side effect profile. NSAIDs (oral, IV, rectal, subcutaneous) are also effective. Naproxen 250mg* q12hrs is particularly effective in neoplastic fever, and possibly diagnostic when infection is ruled out. The order can state “PRN for symptomatic fever” to discourage focusing on an elevated temperature measurement alone.Antibiotic therapy has been shown to be inconsistently useful in alleviating fever symptoms in terminally ill patients. While evidence is unclear as to the utility of providing antibiotic therapy, discussions should address their use as a potential treatment that may or may not improve symptoms and prolong life/delay death; time-limited trials can be appropriate.Glucocorticoids (oral, IM, IV) are also purported to be effective, however most of the data supporting their use exist in the neurological and head injury literature. * Discussed doses are for adults.References:Dinarello CA, Porat R. Chapter 16. Fever and Hyperthermia. In: Longo DL, Fauci AS, Kasper DL, Hauser SL, Jameson JL, Loscalzo J, eds.Harrison's Principles of Internal Medicine. 18th ed. New York: McGraw-Hill; 2012. Available at: http://www.accessmedicine.com/content.aspx?aID=9095580. Accessed March 22, 2012.Zhukovsky DS. Fever and sweats in patient with advanced cancer.Hematol Oncol Clin North Am. 2002;16(3):579-88, viii. PMID: 12170569.Zell JA, Chang JC. Neoplastic fever: a neglected paraneoplastic syndrome.Support Care Cancer. 2005;13(11):870-7. PMID: 15864658.Oh DY, Kim JH, et al. Antibiotic use during the last days of life in cancer patients.Eur J Cancer Care . 2006; 15:74-79.Vitetta L, Kenner D, Sali A. Bacterial infections in terminally ill hospice patients.J Pain Symptom Manage . 2000; 20:326-334.Nakagawa S, Yoshie T, et al. Can anti-infective drugs improve the infection-related symptoms of patients with cancer during the terminal stages of their lives?J Palliat Med . 2010; 13:535-540.Chen LK, Yu-Ching C, et al. Antibiotic prescription for fever episodes in hospice patients.Supp Care Cancer . 2002; 10: 538-541.Acetaminophen (systemic). In: USP DI® Volume I: Drug Information for the Health Care Professional [Internet database]. Greenwood Village, Colo: Thomson Micromedex. Updated periodically.Tabor PA. Drug-induced fever.Drug Intell Clini Pharm. 1986; 20:413-20.Authors’ Affiliation: Drexel University College of Medicine, Philadelphia, PA (SM); University of Pittsburgh Medical Center, Pittsburgh, PA (ES).ACGME Competencies : patient care, communication
#257 Use of Rectal Meds for Palliative Care PatientsAuthors: Renato V Samala MD and Mellar P Davis MDBackground Ever since the days of Hippocrates, medications have been administered through the rectum. ThisFast Fact introduces the use of rectal medications for patients in palliative care settings.Indications & Benefits Rectal administration can be considered when patients have conditions that preclude use of the oral route, such as nausea and vomiting, decreased mental status, severe dysphagia or odynophagia, and gastrointestinal tract obstruction or impaired absorption.. Rectally administered medications are easy to use, require minimal family education, and are inexpensive compared to the subcutaneous or intravenous routes. Additional advantages are the option for self-administration and relatively reliable and predictable drug absorption by the rectum. Since most oral symptom medications used in palliative care can be given rectally (e.g. most opioids, benzodiazepines, glucocorticoids, anti-emetics), a rapidly declining patient at home who can no longer take anything by mouth can often be managed with rectal medications instead of transporting the patient or ordering new drugs.Contraindications & Cautions The rectal route should be avoided in patients with neutropenia, thrombocytopenia, diarrhea, anorectal disease (e.g., perianal abscess and fistulas), and prior abdominoperineal resection. Giving drugs rectally may cause local irritation, producing an inconvenient and uncomfortable sensation of the need to defecate. Serious complications, usually associated with prolonged use of ergotamine, acetylsalicylic acid, and acetaminophen, are rectal ulceration, necrosis, and stenosis. Suppositories are radiopaque and may be mistaken for contrast material or bladder or kidney stones. Some patients and caregivers find rectal administration objectionable.Drug ConsiderationsThe bioavailability of drugs given rectally is influenced by the site of insertion. First-pass metabolism is avoided in the lower part of the rectum drained by the middle and inferior rectal veins which return to the inferior vena cava. The upper rectum, on the other hand, is drained by the superior rectal vein which empties into the portal system and subsequently into the liver. It is, however, difficult to predict how much of the drug will enter the portal circulation due to extensive anastomoses between the rectal veins. Therefore, drugs administered through the rectum, especially opioids, are dosed similarly as when given orally.Any pill can be given rectally. A specially formulated suppository merely assists in its retention and is not required for efficacy. There are a limited number of commercially available drugs specifically manufactured for rectal administration. If consistent use is necessary, almost any medication can be compounded into custom-made suppositories, gelatin-capsule-encased oral medications, or microenemas of oral elixirs. Pertinent drugs which have acceptable rectal bioavailabilities are listed below; those marked with an asterisk (*) are commercially available as a suppository or enema in the US.Opioid Analgesics Morphine* Hydromorphone* Methadone Oxycodone Codeine TramadolCorticosteroids Hydrocortisone Prednisolone DexamethasoneNSAID’s Acetaminophen* Diclofenac Indomethacin* Ibuprofen Naproxen AspirinAnxiolytics Diazepam* Lorazepam Midazolam ClonazepamLaxatives Glycerin* Sodium phosphates* Mineral oil* Bisacodyl* Docusate*Anti-Emetics Prochlorperazine* Promethazine* Chlorpromazine Metoclopramide OndansetrAnti-Epileptics Phenobarbital Pentobarbital Phenytoin Carbamazepine Valproic Acid LamotigrineGuides to Using the Rectal RouteRectum should be emptied prior to insertion as stool interferes with drug absorption.Insert the drug about a finger’s length into the rectum and place against the rectal wall.Tolerance is the same whether the suppository’s apex or base is inserted first, but retention is superior when the base (blunt end) is inserted first. The lower edge of the external sphincter contracts along the edge of the apex and forces the suppository upwards facilitating retention.10 ml warm water can be inserted via syringe to assist dissolution of the suppository or suspension.Keep volume of drug preparation less than 60 ml to avoid spontaneous expulsion before absorption.Bottom Line The rectal route is an efficient and practical alternative in administering a broad array of palliative care medications to patients with a compromised oral route. References:Davis MP, Walsh D, LeGrand SB, Naughton M. Symptom control in cancer patients: the clinical pharmacology and therapeutic role of suppositories and rectal suspensions.Support Care Cancer. 2002; 10:117-138.Warren DE. Practical use of rectal medications in palliative care.J Pain Symptom Manage. 1996; 11(6):378-387.van Hoogdalem E, de Boer AG, Breimer DO. Pharmacokinetics of rectal drug administration, Part I. General considerations and clinical applications of centrally acting drugs.Clin Pharmacokinet. 1991;21(1):11-26.van Hoogdalem E, de Boer AG, Breimer DO. Pharmacokinetics of rectal drug administration, Part II. Clinical applications of peripherally acting drugs, and conclusions.Clin Pharmacokinet. 1991;21(2):110-28.Twycross R, Wilcock A (eds.). Hospice and Palliative Care Formulary USA, 2nd Ed. Nottingham: Palliativedrugs.com Ltd., 2008. ACGME Competencies: medical knowledge, patient careAuthors’ Affiliation: The Harry R. Horvitz Center for Palliative Medicine, Cleveland Clinic, Cleveland, OH.Conflicts of Interest Statement: The authors have disclosed no relevant conflicts of interest.
#258 Diabetes Management at the End-of-LifeAuthors: Elizabeth Jeffreys MD and Drew A Rosielle MDBackground Management of diabetes can pose challenges as patients approach death. While there is little clinical research to guide decision-making, thisFast Fact reviews important considerations and practical recommendations about diabetes care in patients thought to be in their final few months of life.Note : all guidelines here are empiric and based on published, expert recommendations, including blood glucose goals, and all clinical decisions need to be individualized.Important ConsiderationsTight glycemic control benefits patients (e.g., prevents long-term complications such as diabetic retinopathy and nephropathy) only on the order of years.Treatment goals for patients near the end-of-life are to avoidsymptomatic hypo- and hyperglycemia and minimize the burdens of diabetes treatment, butnot to prevent those long-term complications. Tight glycemic control is not a coherent goal near the end of life, and can be dangerous as it encourages hypoglycemia.Both diabetic treatments and uncontrolled diabetes can be burdensome and symptomatic. Hypoglycemia from insulin or oral hypoglycemics causes diaphoresis, anxiety/panic, tremors, weakness, palpitations, seizure, coma. Predictable caloric intake, which typically becomes erratic in dying patients, helps prevent hypoglycemia.Hyperglycemia, sustained for several days, can cause an osmotic diuresis leading to dehydration, thirst, and polyuria. Sustained, severe hyperglycemia (often >800 mg/dL) causes a hyperosmolar hyperglycemic state (‘HHS,’ also known as hyperosmolar nonketotic hyperglycemia), associated with thirst and dry mouth, polyuria, lethargy, and coma. HHS typically occurs in insulin-dependent type 2 diabetics.Diabetic ketoacidosis (DKA) from lack of insulin, occurs most commonly in type 1 diabetics, can develop rapidly (less than a day), and causes hyperventilation, nausea, vomiting, abdominal pain and coma. Fundamentally DKA is caused by a lack of insulin (as opposed to the hyperglycemia itself) and is characterized by acidosis. While blood sugars are usually elevated, commonly 300-800 mg/dL, they can be lower than that especially with poor caloric intake.Treatment burdens include painful fingersticks and gastrointestinal side effects of oral hypoglycemics. Patients with an anticipated survival of a few months Counsel about reducing tight glycemic control and the increased risk of hypoglycemia as oral intake become erratic. Stop A1c testing. There is no clear consensus about blood sugar targets, although the goal is clear: keep blood glucose levels low enough to prevent osmotic symptoms while minimizing the risk of hypoglycemia. Expert recommendations have suggested targeting fasting glucose up to 180 mg/dL (1); however some raise the target to ≤270 and even ≤360 (5, 6). Common sense should guide these decisions (e.g. if a type 1 diabetic has been known to develop DKA with blood sugars as low as 300 mg/dL, the target should be less than that).Type 1 diabetics should continue insulin to prevent DKA, as should type 2 diabetics prone to symptomatic hyperglycemia without insulin.Type 2 diabetics on insulin in addition to oral medications solely for optimal glycemic control (and not to prevent dehydration or HHS) should stop insulin use. If they have any episode of hypoglycemia, doses of oral agents should be halved, with further dose adjustments titrated to meet the aforementioned goals. Glucose checks should occur as infrequently as feasible: for patients at low risk for hyper- or hypoglycemia (e.g. a patient with no history of symptomatic hyperglycemia despite uncontrolled serum glucose in the past), this can be only when symptomatic.Patients with anticipated survival of weeks (1,5,6)Type 1 diabetics or type 2 diabetics prone to HHS should continue insulin therapy to prevent DKA, assuming that is compatible with their care goals. Generally, insulin doses should be tailored to keep fasting blood sugars >180mg/dL to minimize the risk of hypoglycemia, however this goal needs to be tailored to the individual patient. Some amount of basal/long-acting insulin is needed. For patients with erratic oral intake, short-acting insulin should only be used when eating, with conservative doses.Most type 2 diabetics can stop hypoglycemic agents entirely in the final weeks of life, unless they are prone to HHS; blood sugars can be checked and hyperglycemia treated if symptoms such as thirst, polyuria develop. Long-acting sulfonylureas and metformin in particular should be stopped. If needed, use short-acting sulfonylureas (e.g. glipizide) to minimize the possibility of sustained hypoglycemia. Metformin accumulates with renal failure.Patients in the final days of life (1,2,5,6) Most patients have decreasing levels and periods of consciousness, and minimal oral intake. All insulin, hypoglycemics, and monitoring can be stopped in type 2 diabetics. DKA can still develop rapidly ( <1 day) for type 1 diabetics, and it can be reasonable (and emotionally important for families) to continue insulin therapy with liberal (e.g. <360mg/dL) blood sugar targets. Family/patient preferences and patient level of consciousness should be considered in making a joint decision as to what to do.Emotional & Communication Considerations For some patients and families, careful attention to diabetes management is an empowering and satisfying health promotion activity, and can continue to be so near life’s end. It may be one of the few health-related activities they can maintain control and mastery over. Suggestions to stop diabetes medications or blood glucose checks can be seen as lack of concern or indifference to a patient’s health. The burden of blood glucose fingerstick checks may be less than the anxiety over not checking. Be careful to frame such discussionstherapeutically , clarifying that stopping or adjusting medications is being done to prevent harm and promote patient well-being (2,3). ReferencesAngelo M, Ruchalski C, Sproge BJ. An approach to diabetes mellitus in hospice and palliative medicine.J Palliat Med . 2011; 14(1):83-7.Boyd K.Diabetes mellitus in hospice patients: some guidelines. Palliat Med. 1993; 7(2):163-4.Budge P.Management of diabetes in patients at the end of life. Nurs Stand. 2010;25(6):42-6.Ford-Dunn S, Smith A, Quin J.Management of diabetes during the last days of life: attitudes of consultant diabetologists and consultant palliative care physicians in the UK. Palliat Med . 2006; 20(3):197-203.King EJ, Haboubi H, Evans D, et al.The management of diabetes in terminal illness related to cancer. QJM. 2012; 105:3-9.McCoubrie R, Jeffrey D, Paton C, Dawes L. Managing diabetes mellitus in patients with advanced cancer: a case note audit and guidelines.Eur J Cancer Care . 2005; 14(3):244-8.Quinn K, Hudson P, Dunning T.Diabetes management in patients receiving palliative care. J Pain Symptom Manage. 2006; 32(3):275-86.Vandenhaute V.Palliative care and type II diabetes: A need for new guidelines? Am J Hosp Palliat Care. 2010; 27(7):444-5. Authors’ Affiliations: University of Minnesota Medical School (EJ, DAR) & Fairview Health Services (DAR), Minneapolis, MN.
#259 ModafinilAuthors: Jennifer Cheng MD and Hunter Groninger MDBackground: Modafinil is a non-amphetamine psychostimulant approved for the treatment of excessive daytime somnolence associated with obstructive sleep apnea, narcolepsy, and shift work sleep disorder. Expanding research demonstrates potential indications for modafinil in cancer and non-cancer palliative care settings. ThisFast Fact reviews use of modafinil for symptom management in the seriously ill.Pharmacology: Although the exact mechanism is unclear, modafinil’s action may involve enhanced catecholaminergic signaling and decreased gamma aminobutryic acid (GABA) release, primarily at the anterior hypothalamus (1)(2). Rapidly absorbed after oral ingestion, the drug reaches peak plasma levels in 2-4 hours, with a half-life of 10-13 hours. It is primarily metabolized by the liver, with subsequent renal elimination of inactive metabolites. Compared to methylphenidate, modafinil has low-abuse potential and less rapid development of tolerance (3).Research Findings:In cancer populations : One placebo-controlled trial with a 200 mg daily dose of modafinil resulted in significantly reduced excessive daytime sleepiness in patients with severe chemotherapy related fatigue (4). Modafinil has also been shown to be effective for specific symptoms in non-small cell lung cancer (fatigue, daytime drowsiness, depression), in breast cancer (fatigue), and in brain cancer (cognitive functioning, mood, and fatigue, and activity) (5) (6) (7). Finally, in advanced-stage cancer patients with Karnofsky performance status of 50-70%, modafinil 200 mg daily improved attention and psychomotor speed as well as subjective scores of drowsiness and depression (2).In non-cancer conditions : Generally, these smaller controlled trials have generated conflicting results. Compared to placebo, use of modafinil may reduce fatigue in patients with HIV/AIDS and amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (8, 9). However, recent studies have not shown significant improvement in fatigue in patients with multiple sclerosis, Parkinson’s disease, and myotonic muscular dystrophy (10, 11, 12). There are limited data comparing modafinil and methylphenidate in cancer and non-cancer populations; one open label pilot trial comparing modafinil with methylphenidate immediate release and methylphenidate sustained release in primary brain tumor patients found no significant difference in cognitive improvement between groups (13). Studies (4), (6), (7), (10) were sponsored by modafinil’s manufacturer.Dosage: Lower doses (50-200 mg, once daily in the morning) are generally prescribed for fatigue and concentration difficulties, and higher doses (up to 600 mg/day) are used for excessive sleepiness (14).Toxicity and Precautions:More common side effects includes dose related headaches (34%), nausea (11%), nervousness (7%), and diarrhea (6%). Hypertension rarely occurs, but monitoring of blood pressure is recommended (15).In patients with severe hepatic impairment, reduce dose by 50%. Safety and efficacy have not been evaluated for patients with renal impairment (15). Use cautiously in patients with bipolar disorder or preexisting psychosis (may stimulate mania/hypomania) (16) and in patients with ischemic or structural heart disease (may precipitate palpitations, tachyarrhythmia, or chest pain) (15).Cost: Modafinil costs approximately $608 for thirty 100 mg tablets compared to $33 for thirty tablets of methylphenidate 10 mg (17).Summary: Palliative care patients are often seriously debilitated by fatigue, excessive daytime somnolence, and depression and modafinil may reduce these symptoms. Pending more conclusive randomized controlled trials, its use is likely limited by cost and availability. Nonetheless, even now modafinil may have a therapeutic niche when methylphenidate use is contraindicated or limited due to side effects.References:Lin J-S, Hou Y, Jouvet M. Potential brain neural targets for amphetamine-, methylphenidate-, and modafinil-induced wakefulness, evidenced by c-fos immunochemistry in the cat.Proc Natl Acad Sci USA . 1996; 93:14128-14133.Ludorff LE, Jonsson BH, Sjogren P. Modafinil for attentional and psychomotor dysfunction in advanced cancer: a double-blind, randomized, cross-over trial.Palliat Med . 2009; 23(8): 731-738.Webster L, Andrews M, Stoddard G. Modafinil treatment of opioid-induced sedation. Pain Med. 2003; 4:135-140.Jean-Pierre P, Morrow GR, Roscoe JA. A phase 3 randomized, placebo-controlled, double-blind, clinical trial of the effect of modafinil on cancer-related fatigue among 631 patients receiving chemotherapy.Cancer . 2010; 116:3513-3520.Spathis A, Dhillan R, Booden D, et al. Modafinil for the treatment of fatigue in lung cancer: a pilot study.Palliat Med . 2009; 23:325-331.Morrow GR, Gillies LJ, Hickok JT, et al. The positive effect of the psychostimulant modafinil on fatigue from cancer that persists after treatment is completed.J Clin Oncol . 2005; 3(Suppl.):8012.Kaleita TA, Wellisch DK, Graham CA, et al. Pilot study of modafinil for treatment of neurobehavioral dysfunction and fatigue in adult patients with brain tumors.J Clin Oncol . 2006; 24(Suppl.):1503.Rabkin JG, McElhiney MC, Rabkin R, McGrath P. Modafinil treatment for fatigue in patients with HIV/AIDS: a placebo controlled study.J Clin Psych. 2010; 71(6):707-715.Rabkin JG, Gordon PH, McElhiney M, et al. Modafinil treatment of fagitue in patients with ALS: a placebo-controlled study.Muscle Nerve . 2009; 39:297-303.Moller F, Poettgen J, Broemel F, et al. HAGIL (Hamburg Vigil Study): a randomized placebo-controlled double-blind study with modafinil for treatment of fatigue in patients with multiple sclerosis.Mult Scler . 2011; 17:1002-1009.Seppi K, Weintraub D, Coelho M, et al. The Movement disorder society evidence-based medicine review update: treatments for the non-motor symptoms of Parkinson's disease.Movement Disorders . 2011; 26(S3):42-80.Orlikowski D, Chevret S, Quera-Salva MA, et al. Modafinil for the treatment of hypersomnia associated with myotonic muscular dystrophy in adults: a multicenter, prospective, randomized, double-blind, placebo-controlled, 4-week trial.Clin Therap . 2009; 31(8):1765-1773.Gehring K, Patwardhan SY, Collins R, et al. A randomized trial on the efficacy of methylphenidate and modafinil for improving cognitive functioning and symptoms in patients with a primary brain tumor.J Neurooncol. 2012; 107(1):165-7.Harris JD. Fatigue in chronically ill patients.Curr Opin Supp Pall Care. 2008; 2:180-186.Modafinil: drug information. InPDR® Electronic Library™ (n.d.). Retrieved on May 10, 2012, from http://www.thomsonhc.com . Greenwood Village, CO : Thomson Reuters (Healthcare) Inc.Wingo AP, Ghaemi SN. Frequency of stimulant treatment and of stimulant-associated mania/hypomania in bipolar disorder patients.Psychopharmacol Bull . 2008; 41(4):37-47.Drugstore.com Online Pharmacy - Prescription Drugs, Health and Beauty, plus More. Available at: http://drugstore.com . Accessed: 15 Mar 2012.Authors’ Affiliations: Johns Hopkins University School of Medicine, Baltimore, MD (JC); Clinical Center, National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, MD (HG).Conflicts of Interest Statement: The authors have disclosed no relevant conflicts of interest.ACGME Competencies: Patient Care, Medical KnowledgeKeywords: Non Pain Symptoms and Syndromes
#260 Opioid Use in Liver FailureAuthors: Carlene Oliverio PharmD, BCPS, Natalie Malone PharmD, Drew A Rosielle MDBackground: Most opioids are at least partially metabolized by the liver, complicating their use in liver failure. ThisFast Fact discusses the use of opioids in patients with liver failure (see alsoFast Facts #161 about opioid use in renal failure,#176 and#177 about managing ascites and #189 about prognostication in end-stage liver disease).Note: while there are plenty of pharmacokinetic data about opioids & liver failure, all the clinical recommendations below are rational and empiric, but not based on clinical outcomes research.Hepatic Opioid Metabolism: There are two different types of chemical reactions involved in hepatic drug metabolism. The first group,oxidation/reduction reactions , occurs through the cytochrome (CYP) P450 enzyme system. The CYP450 enzymes most relevant in palliative medicine include CYP1A2, 2D6, 2C9, 2C19, 3A3 and 3A4; most opioids are metabolized by these enzymes. In hepatic failure, opioid clearance is reduced and drug bioavailability is increased. These changes can be secondary to reduced hepatic blood flow (limiting first-pass metabolism) or decreased CYP450 enzyme levels in these patients.Conjugation and glucuronidation comprise the second group of chemical reactions in the liver. These reactions are less affected in hepatic disease due to glucuronidation enzyme preservation in these patients and also because of extrahepatic glucuronidation processes present in other organs. Glucuronidated opioid metabolites are generally renally excreted. Changes such as decreased serum albumin and ascites can also alter opioid volume of distribution which can lead to either increased or decreased drug concentrations, although there is no practical way to ‘test’ for or predict this apart from close clinical observation.Morphine: Morphine is metabolized by glucuronidation to two major metabolites, morphine-3-glucuronide (M3G) and morphine-6-glucuronide (M6G). M6G is an active analgesic that is more potent than morphine, while M3G has no analgesic effect but contributes to neurotoxic side effects such as confusion. Morphine accumulation has been reported in liver disease which can result from decreased plasma clearance and/or increased elimination half-life of the parent drug. In patients with early liver disease, initial lower doses should be used, but at normal dosing intervals. However, as the disease progresses to advanced hepatic failure, longer dosing intervals may be necessary.Oxycodone: Oxycodone is metabolized to two different metabolites by CYP2D6 and 3A4. However, neither metabolite contributes significantly to analgesia. In advanced liver failure, oxycodone’s maximum concentration increases 40%, and immediate-release oxycodone’s half-life increases to 4.6-24.4 hours (average 14 hours; its usual half-life is ~3.5 hours). Initial oxycodone dosing in patients with severe hepatic failure should be reduced to 30%-50% of the recommended starting dose.Codeine & Meperidine: Both these drugs should be avoided entirely in patients with liver failure. Codeine is a prodrug that is hepatically converted to morphine by CYP2D6. In patients with liver dysfunction, pain control can be compromised if codeine is not metabolized. Meperidine is metabolized by CYP3A4 to normeperidine and also by hydrolysis. In hepatic disease, meperidine clearance is reduced and its half-life is prolonged. Seizures, a major side effect of meperidine and normeperidine, can occur at reduced doses in patients with hepatic failure (seeFast Fact#71 ).Hydromorphone & Hydrocodone: Hydromorphone is glucuronidated to metabolites which have no analgesic properties but can be neurotoxic (seeFast Facts#57 ,58 , and142 ).:Hydrocodone is a prodrug metabolized by CYP2D6 to hydromorphone and other metabolites, and is only available in combination with non-opioids such as acetaminophen. Hydrocodone dose titrations are limited by the non-opioid component, and overconsumption of acetaminophen- containing products is hepatotoxic. In patients with severe liver disease, initial starting doses of each drug should be reduced to 50% of normal and as the disease progresses, prolonged dosing intervals may also be necessary.Fentanyl: Fentanyl is primarily metabolized by CYP3A4 and quickly redistributes to muscle and fat upon administration. In single-bolus studies, intravenous fentanyl’s pharmacokinetics were unchanged by liver failure, however its half-life is prolonged in liver failure with repeated dosing or high dose therapy. Transdermal fentanyl has not been adequately studied in liver failure. Hepatic failure can alter skin permeability and drug absorption; the clinical relevance of this, if any, has not been determined. Some experts suggest fentanyl is a preferred opioid in liver failure (1, 4), although this judgment appears to be entirely empiric.Methadone: Methadone is metabolized by CYP3A4, 2D6 and 1A2. Methadone’s clearance is reduced in severe liver disease. Notably, however, hepatitis C infection stimulates CYP3A4 activity and may actually increase methadone clearance, particularly early on (before overt liver failure occurs).Clinical Management Pearls: As in any clinical setting, the ‘right dose’ of an opioid analgesic medication is that which provides adequate pain relief in conjunction with an acceptable side effect profile. This statement is especially true in end stage liver disease (ESLD), and doses should not be decreased solely out of concern for hepatic disease (e.g., if a patient with ESLD appears to tolerate and require q3 hour dosing of oxycodone, that dosage should continue). In general, lower doses of most opioids should be initiated in patients with ESLD, and clinicians should be cautious prescribing opioids at ‘regular’ dosing intervals until patients have demonstrated an ability to tolerate the dosing interval.: Patients with deteriorating liver function should be closely monitored for signs of drug accumulation and need for dose reductions, assuming the level of analgesia remains acceptable. Finally, potential drug interactions involving the CYP450 enzyme system must always be considered as there is potential for non-opioid medications to either induce or inhibit the metabolism of any opioid that is a CYP450 enzyme substrate.ReferencesRhee C, Broadbent AM. Palliation and liver failure: palliative medications dosing guidelines.J Pall Med. 2007; 10:677-685.Zichterman A. Opioid pharmacology and considerations in pain management. May 2007.US Pharmacist (Web). Available at:http://www.uspharmacist.com/continuing_education/ceviewtest/lessonid/105473/ . Accessed July 19, 2012.Davis M. Cholestasis and endogenous opioids: liver disease and exogenous opioid pharmacokinetics.Clin Pharmacokinet 2007; 46:825-850.Johnson SJ. Opioid safety in patients with renal or hepatic dysfunction. June 2007.Pain Treatment Topics (Web). Available at:http://pain-topics.org/pdf/Opioids-Renal-Hepatic-Dysfunction.htm#search='opioids and liver failure' . Accessed July 3, 2012.Tegeder I, Lotsch J, Geisslinger G. Pharmacokinetics of opioids in liver disease.Clin Pharmacokinet. 1999; 37:17-40.Authors’ Affiliations: Lake Health System & Ohio Northern University, Concord, OH (CO); Mount Carmel St. Ann’s Hospital, Westerville, OH (NM); University of Minnesota Medical School & Fairview Health Services, Minneapolis, MN (DAR).ACGME Competencies : Patient Care, Medical Knowledge
#261 Hot Flashes in Palliative Care – Part 1Authors: Carolyn Lefkowits MD and Robert Arnold MDBackground: Hot flashes (or ‘flushes’) are a common symptom which can negatively impact quality of life. Failure to assess and offer treatment for hot flashes is common. ThisFast Fact is the first in a three part series reviewing hot flash assessment and treatment.Symptoms: A hot flash is a “subjective sensation of heat that is associated with objective signs of cutaneous vasodilation and subsequent drop in core temperature” (1). It usually starts with a sudden sensation of heat on the face and upper chest that becomes generalized, often associated with perspiration followed by chills and shivering. Other symptoms can include dizziness, palpitations and headaches. Psychological symptoms include irritability, depression, panic, and social embarrassment. Hot flashes can lead to sleep disturbance, likely due to frequent waking and autonomic arousal. Hot flash duration, frequency, and severity are variable, both from person to person and day to day; average duration is 3-5 minutes. Nocturnal hot flashes are most common during the first four hours of sleep.Physiology: The physiology of hot flashes is not completely understood, but has been attributed to changes in sex hormones leading to thermoregulatory dysfunction. In healthy women, hot flashes occur as part of the normal menopausal transition. In a longitudinal study of 3300 women (2), risk factors for hot flashes were found to includesmokinglower socioeconomic statusobesityanxietyhistory of childhood abuse or neglectAfrican-American race.Hot Flashes and Cancer: Cancer therapies leading to hormonal changes and hot flashes include oophrectomy, chemotherapy and endocrine therapies (tamoxifen and aromatase inhibitors for breast cancer and androgen deprivation therapy for prostate cancer). Women who are already postmenopausal do not generally experience treatment-related hot flashes unless they were on hormone replacement therapy that is stopped at the time of the cancer diagnosis. Cancer treatment-related hot flashes may be more abrupt in onset and more severe than those experienced as part of normal menopause. Greater than 90% of women with surgically-induced menopause will experience hot flashes; up to 80% of women on tamoxifen report hot flashes, 30% rate them as severe. 34-80% of men treated with androgen-deprivation therapy for prostate cancer report hot flashes. In breast cancer patients, severity of hot flashes has been correlated with decreased quality of life and overall sense of well being. Men with hot flashes from androgen-deprivation report more persistent cancer-related distress than those without hot flashes.AssessmentPhysical and emotional symptoms accompanying hot flashesImpact on daily life including sleepHot flash triggers or patterns of occurrence (e.g. stress, alcohol, caffeine, spicy food, hot showers, hot weather, smoking and overheated bedrooms).Maintain a one-week diary of hot flash frequency, duration, triggers and severity (usually measured as mild, moderate, severe or very severe). Examples of hot flash symptom diaries are available: http://i.ivillage.com/health/hotflash_diary_pdf_2pg.htm http://www.lhsc.on.ca/Patients_Families_Visitors/LRCP/Managing_Side_Effects/HFDiary.htmNote: objective measurement devices have been developed, but prospective diaries remain the gold standard.Summary: A thorough assessment is important to determine a treatment plan.ReferencesBoekhout AH, Beijnen JH, Schellens JH. Symptoms and treatment in cancer therapy-induced early menopause.Oncologist , 2006;11(6): 641-654.Thurston RC, Joffe H. Vasomotor symptoms and menopause: findings from the Study of Women's Health across the Nation.Obstet Gynecol Clin North Am . 2001; 38(3): 489-501.Gupta P, Sturdee DW, Palin SL et al. Menopausal symptoms in women treated for breast cancer: the prevalence and severity of symptoms and their perceived effects on quality of life.Climacteric . 2006; 9(1):49-58.Loprinzi CL & Barton DL. Gadgets for measuring hot flashes: have they become the gold standard?J Support Oncol. 2009; 7(4):136-7.Authors’ Affiliations: University of Pittsburgh Medical Center, Pittsburgh, PA.ACGME Competencies : Medical knowledge, Patient care
#262 Hot Flashes in Palliative Care – Part 2Authors: Carolyn Lefkowits MD and Robert Arnold MDBackground: Hot flashes (‘flushes’) are a common and disabling symptom, particularly when caused by cancer treatment. Assessment of hot flashes was reviewed inFast Fact#261 . ThisFast Fact will cover procedural and pharmacological treatment of hot flashes. Complementary and alternative therapies are reviewed inFast Fact#263 .Pharmacologic Treatments: The most well studied populations with cancer treatment-related hot flashes are patients with breast and prostate cancer. Efficacy of pharmacologic treatments seems to be independent of whether the hot flashes are caused by treatment and independent of the patient’s sex. The average improvement in hot flashes associated with placebo is around 25% (1), so improvements associated with pharmacologic therapies are typically compared to placebo.Hormonal Therapies : In general, hormonal therapies are more effective than non-hormonal therapies. Estrogen and progestins are effective in both men and women. Estrogen and progestins are contraindicated in women with a history of breast cancer because of concern for increased risk of recurrence. In men, estrogen therapy is associated with breast tenderness and gynecomastia. Common side effects of progestins include weight gain, nausea and edema. Both estrogen and progestins are associated with some risk of thromboembolic disease and cardiovascular disease. Cyproterone, an antiandrogen (not available in the US), also works in men, but may interfere with androgen deprivation therapy for prostate cancer.Antidepressants: The mechanism of by which selective serotonin reuptake inhibitors (SSRIs) or serotonin-norepinephrine reuptake inhibitors (SNRIs) reduce hot flashes is thought to be related to the role of serotonin and norepinephrine in thermoregulation. Randomized controlled trials have supported the efficacy of fluoxetine, paroxetine, sertraline, citalopram, escitalopram, venlafaxine and desvenlafaxine. Pooled analysis of 7 trials showed a positive effect greater than placebo as follows: paroxetine (10-25mg) 41%, venlafaxine (75mg) 33%, fluoxetine (20mg) 13%, sertraline (50mg) 3-18% (2). Citalopram (20mg) works about as well as venlafaxine and paroxetine (3).ManySSRIs can interfere with the effectiveness of tamoxifen as they inhibit cytochrome P450 enzyme CYP2D6, which is involved in tamoxifen metabolism. Paroxetine and fluoxetine are the strongest CYP2D6 inhibitors, followed, in order of decreasing potency of inhibition, by sertraline, citalopram, and venlafaxine. All SSRIs have similar side effect profiles, including sexual dysfunction, drowsiness, weight gain, insomnia, anxiety, dizziness and headache.Gabapentin : A pooled analysis of 3 trial s showed reduction in hot flashes of 35-38% over placebo at doses of 900-2400 mg/day (2). The mechanism by which gabapentin reduces hot flashes is not clear. Adding an SSRI to gabapentin has not been shown to be additionally effective.Clonidine : Appears to be marginally, but statistically significantly, better than placebo, with side effects including dry mouth, drowsiness, and constipation (4).Procedural: Pilot data suggest that a stellate-ganglion block may be effective. A small study of 13 patients with a history of breast cancer treated with a stellate-ganglion block (once or twice) showed a decrease in the total number of hot flashes per week, as well as number of very severe hot flashes per week over a three-month period (5). Though standard procedural risks apply, there were no reported adverse effects from the block in this small series.Summary: It is reasonable to use either gabapentin or an SSRI/SNRI as first line treatment. Of the SSRI/SNRI group, venlafaxine and citalopram are among the most effective and have a low risk of interfering with tamoxifen. Paroxetine and fluoxetine should be avoided in patients on tamoxifen.References: 1. Sloan JA, Loprinzi CL, Novotny PJ, et al. Methodologic lessons learned from hot flash studies.J Clin Oncol. 2001; 19(23):4280-90. 2. Loprinzi CL, Sloan J, Stearns V, et al. Newer antidepressants and gabapentin for hot flashes: an individual patient pooled analysis.J Clin Oncol . 2009; 27(17):2831-37. 3. Loprinzi CL, Barton DL, Qin R. Nonestrogenic management of hot flashes.J Clin Oncol . 2011; 29(29):3842-46. 4. Goldberg RM, Loprinzi CL, O'Fallon JR, et al. Transdermal clonidine for ameliorating tamoxifen-induced hot flashes.J Clin Oncol . 1994; 12(1):155-8. 5. Lipov EG, Joshi JR, Sanders S, et al. Effects of stellate-ganglion block on hot flushes and night awakenings in survivors of breast cancer: a pilot study.Lancet Oncol . 2008; 9(6):523-32. 6. Frisk J. Managing hot flushes in men after prostate cancer - a systematic review.Maturitas. 2010; 65(1): 15-22. 7. Loibl S, Lintermans A, Dieudonne AS, Neven P. Management of menopausal symptoms in breast cancer patients.Maturitas . 2011; 68(2): 148-54. 8. Rada G, Capurro D, Pantoja T et al. Non-hormonal interventions for hot flushes in women with a history of breast cancer.Cochrane Database Syst Rev 2010; (9), CD004923.Authors’ Affiliatons: University of Pittsburgh Medical Center, Pittsburgh, PA.ACGME Competencies : Medical knowledge, Patient care
#263 Hot Flashes in Palliative Care – Part 3Authors: Carolyn Lefkowits, MD and Robert Arnold, MDBackground: Assessment and drug treatments of hot flashes (‘flushes’) were discussed inFast Facts#261 and262 ; thisFast Fact reviews non-drug and complementary/alternative medicine (CAM) therapies. An estimated 50-75% of postmenopausal women use CAM for menopausal symptoms. Several studies have found that women with a history of breast cancer are even more likely than healthy age-matched controls to use CAM for menopausal symptoms including hot flashes. In the breast cancer population, higher likelihood of using CAM is seen in women of younger age, higher education, higher income and participation in regular exercise or support groups.CAM PharmacologicTherapiesIsoflavones : studies of isoflavones (black cohosh, dong quai, red clover and soy proteins) have failed to show efficacy.Vitamin E : one randomized, placebo-controlled crossover trial showed a difference in hot flashes that was statistically, but not clinically significant (one less hot flash per day) (1)Evening primrose oil (high in omega-6 fatty acids) has not been shown to be more effective than placebo and data from a small trial of an Omega 3 fatty acid preparation (‘Loveza’) 2 gm/day is inconclusive (2).Magnesium is appealing because of its low cost ($0.02/tablet). Two pilot trials without control groups suggested effectiveness; a phase III trial is being developed (3, 4).Nonpharmacologic TherapiesLifestyle : Observational studies suggest that avoiding tobacco, keeping ambient temperatures cool and limiting or avoiding caffeine, alcohol, spicy foods and hot liquids may be helpful.Hypnosis : A few small, uncontrolled studies and one RCT have suggested a beneficial effect of hypnosis on hot flashes. In the randomized trial there was a 68% decrease in the hot flash score compared to pre-intervention (p <0.001), as well as significant improvements in self-reported anxiety, depression, interference of hot flashes with daily activities and sleep. A randomized clinical trial comparing the hypnosis protocol to a placebo control is underway (5).Cognitive behavioral therapy (CBT) : A recent RCT showed benefit of six, weekly, 90 min CBT sessions for hot flashes in women with history of breast cancer (6). Using a 1-10 rating scale, the intervention group had their mean severity score reduced by -1.67 at 9 weeks after randomization, although there was no difference in hot flash frequency. The intervention group also had less depressed mood, fewer sleep problems and better self-reported mental health at 9 weeks after randomization and less pain at 26 weeks.Relaxation therapy : Two RCTs of relaxation therapy in breast cancer patients were included in a Cochrane review (7). One trial (n=16) showed no effect while the other (n=150) found a short term decreased incidence and severity of hot flashes and well as decreased distress caused by hot flashes; the effect disappeared by three months.Yoga : Studies of yoga on overall menopausal symptom burden have shown mixed results, including two RCTs that did not show any improvement in physical symptoms (8,9). One RCT looking at multiple measures of menopausal symptoms did find yoga to be associated with decreased vasomotor symptoms (10). Another RCT found decreased overall menopausal symptom burden, including decrease in a subscale score that included hot flashes (11). The only RCT of yoga where the primary outcome was hot flashes was a trial with n=37 of an 8 week yoga program. The intervention group had significantly greater reduction in hot flash frequency and severity and the effect persisted at 3 months (12).Acupuncture, Homeopathy, Exercise : data from the Cochrane review has failed to demonstrate benefit for these modalities (7).Conclusion: It is difficult to make general recommendations regarding use of complementary and alternative therapies for hot flashes because the evidence base is generally limited to studies of small size and short duration. The therapies with the best evidence of efficacy, all of which have low side-effect burden, are magnesium, hypnosis, cognitive behavioral therapy, and yoga.ReferencesBarton DL, Loprinzi CL, Quella SK, et al. Prospective evaluation of vitamin E for hot flashes in breast cancer survivors. J Clin Oncol. 1998; 16(2): 495-500.Freeman MP, Hibbeln JR, Silver M et al. Omega-3 fatty acids for major depressive disorder associated with the menopausal transition: a preliminary open trial.Menopause . 2011; 18(3):279-284.Park H, Parker GL, Boardman CH, Morris MM, Smith TJ. A pilot phase II trial of magnesium supplements to reduce menopausal hot flashes in breast cancer patients.Support Care Cancer . 2011; 19(6):859-863..Smith TJ. Magnesium supplements for menopausal hot flashes.J Clin Oncol . 2009; 27(7): 1151-52.Elkins G, Marcus J, Stearns V, et al. Randomized trial of a hypnosis intervention for treatment of hot flashes among breast cancer survivors.J Clin Oncol. 2008; 26(31):5022-26.Mann E, Smith MJ, Hellier J, et al. Cognitive behavioural treatment for women who have menopausal symptoms after breast cancer treatment (MENOS 1): a randomised controlled trial.Lancet Oncol . 2012; 13(3):309-318.Rada G, Capurro D, Pantoja T, et al. Non-hormonal interventions for hot flushes in women with a history of breast cancer.Cochrane Database Syst Rev . 2010 Sep 8;(9), CD004923.Elavsky S, McAuley E. Physical activity and mental health outcomes during menopause: a randomized controlled trial.Ann Behav Med . 2007; 33(2):132-142.Choi SY OH, Kang YS. Effects of health promotion program on stress and menopausal symptoms in menopausal women.J Korean Acad Adult Nurs. 2007; 19:353-364.Chattha R, Raghuram N, Venkatram P, Hongasandra NR. Treating the climacteric symptoms in Indian women with an integrated approach to yoga therapy: a randomized control study.Menopause. 2008; 15(5):862-870.Joshi S, Khandwe R, Bapat D, Deshmukh U. Effect of yoga on menopausal symptoms.Menopause Int . 2011; 17(3):78-81.Carson JW, Carson KM, Porter LS, Keefe FJ, Seewaldt VL. Yoga of Awareness program for menopausal symptoms in breast cancer survivors: results from a randomized trial.Support Care Cancer. 2009;17(10):1301-09.Nahleh Z, Tabbara IA. Complementary and alternative medicine in breast cancer patients.Palliative and Supportive Care. 2003; 1(3): 267-73.Authors’ Affiliations: University of Pittsburgh Medical Center, Pittsburgh, PA.
#264 Prostacyclin Withdrawal in Pulmonary HypertensionAuthors: Christi Bartlett MD and Lindy Landzaat DO in cooperation with the COPE Collaborative*Background: Pulmonary artery hypertension (PAH) is a disease of the pulmonary vascular system characterized by elevated pulmonary vascular resistance. Patients with advanced PAH are often treated with prostacyclins. ThisFast Fact reviews suggested guidelines for withdrawal of prostacyclin therapy in dying patients with PAH.Physiology/Symptoms: PAH is defined as a mean pulmonary arterial pressure greater than 25 mmHg and may lead to right ventricular failure (1). Symptoms include dyspnea, cough, syncope, fatigue, angina, and peripheral edema, often progressing to respiratory failure and cardiovascular collapse.Prostacyclin Treatment: Prostacyclin medications, epoprostenol and treprostinil, are effective in extending life in PAH (2). These drugs are administered via continuous parenteral infusion (IV; treprostinil can be given subcutaneously). Epoprostenol’s half-life is six minutes (3); abrupt withdrawal can lead to significant symptom burden (dyspnea, anxiety, nausea, light-headedness, chest and abdominal pain) and rapid death.Discontinuation of Prostacyclin Therapy: Despite the use of prostacyclins and other life-prolonging treatments, PAH is usually progressive and fatal without lung transplantation. When the goals of care include discontinuation of prostacyclins, this process can create anxiety among patients and caregivers due to concerns about the rapid development of distressing symptoms. Because of this, it is felt best to taper prostacylins in a planned, controlled manner. There are no guidelines regarding how to taper off IV prostacyclins, let alone any research data to guide clinicians. The following recommendations, however, have been developed by the COPE Collaborative * and are based on clinical experience and rational pharmacology.A benzodiazepine and/or opioid should be given as premedication and be readily available for rapid administration following initiation of withdrawal of prostacyclin therapy. Actual doses however need to be closely tailored to an individual patient’s prior exposure to opioids and benzodiazepines and acceptable level of consciousness. SeeFast Fact #34 (regimen A) for some general guidelines.The rate of medication taper should account for the medication’s half-life. Because epoprostenol has a short half life, we recommend waiting 4-6 half lives (generally 25-30 minutes) and monitoring for symptoms prior to further titration. Treprostinil, with a half life of approximately 4 hours, can be titrated downward every 4-6 hours.Reduce the prostacyclin in 20-25% increments, with close monitoring for symptoms as a new steady state is achieved.With each dose reduction, the patient should be closely monitored for increasing symptoms. If symptoms are minimal or otherwise well controlled with opioids or benzodiazepines, the prostacyclin taper may continue. If the patient experiences distressing symptoms (dyspnea, anxiety, chest pain), the taper should be held until symptoms are managed and the taper resumed at a slower rate, with smaller interval dose reductions. Conversely, if the patient is unresponsive and is tolerating the titration well with minimal symptom burden, the rate of titration can be cautiously increased.Similar to the planned discontinuation of mechanical ventilation in a dying patient (seeFast Facts #33 ,34 and35 ), it is recommended that the de-escalation of IV prostacyclins occur in the inpatient setting under close physician supervision. In the home setting, a physician should be present at the bedside along with the support of a knowledgeable hospice team, with ample medications readily available in-home, as symptoms can develop quickly and patients often need rapid medication adjustments to maintain comfort. *Care Of Pulmonary hypertension patients at End-of-life (COPE) Collaborative members: Christi Bartlett MD, Lindy Landzaat DO, Karin Porter-Williamson MD, Lewis Satterwhite MD, Leslie Spikes MD, Ryan Westhoff MD, Tim Williamson MD; University of Kansas, Kansas City, KS.References:The Task Force for the Diagnosis and Treatment of Pulmonary Hypertension of the European Society of Cardiology (ESC) and the European Respiratory Society (ERS), endorsed by the International Society of Heart and Lung Transplantation (ISHLT). Guidelines for the diagnosis and treatment of pulmonary hypertension.Eur Heart J . 2009; 30:2493-2537.Skoro-Sajer N, Lang I. The role of treprostinil in the management of pulmonary hypertension.Am J Carciovasc Drugs . 2008; 8(4):213-7.Epoprostenol Sodium [Drug Monograph]. Mississauga, Ontario: GlaxoSmithKline Inc.: 2011. Available from:http://www.gsk.ca/english/docs-pdf/Flolan_2011.htm . Accessed: Sept 18, 2012.Authors’ Affiliation: University of Kansas Medical Center, Kansas City, KS.ACGME Competencies: medical knowledge, patient care, systems based practice
#265-Palliative Care for Patients with Cystic FibrosisAuthors: Juvianee Estrada-Veras MD and Hunter Groninger MDBackground Cystic fibrosis (CF) is an autosomal recessive disorder of the cystic fibrosis transmembrane regulator (CFTR) that affects the respiratory tract, pancreas, intestines, male genital tract, hepatobiliary system, and exocrine sweat glands resulting in multisystem disease. ThisFast Fact discusses the natural history of CF and issues related to palliative care for patients with CF.Morbidity and Death in CF The life expectancy of patients with CF has improved over the last 50 years. In 1959, the median age at death was 6 months and in 2008 it increased to 27 years. For those born in the year 2000, the median age of survival is predicted to reach 50 years. This improved survival is attributed to advances in the supportive care of patients including early diagnosis, family support, attention to nutrition, infection control, and the use of nebulised mucolytics and antimicrobials (2).Chronic progressive pulmonary disease and respiratory failure remain the major cause of morbidity and mortality. End-stage lung disease is characterized by cysts, abscesses, and fibrosis of lungs and airways. Patients frequently die from overwhelming lung infections.Factors associated with earlier death in CF include the deltaF508 mutation, pancreatic insufficiency, low body mass index, certain infections (Pseudomonas aeruginosa ,Staphylococcus aureus, andBurkholderia cepacia ), low socioeconomic status, tobacco smoke exposure and female sex (1,2).For select candidates, lung transplantation improves survival and quality-of-life. The 5-year survival post-transplant is about 50%.Other important causes of morbidity include CF-related diabetes mellitus, pancreatic insufficiency (manifesting as fat malabsorption, poor growth, and hemolytic anemia), hepatobiliary disease (including portal hypertension and varices), male infertility, and meconium ileus in newborns.CF patients commonly suffer from cough, fatigue, and dyspnea; these symptoms tend to worsen as lung disease progresses. Chest wall and back pain from cough, pleurisy, rib fractures, and chest physiotherapy is common (3). Fears of addiction, respiratory depression, and concern that chronic opioid use complicates lung transplant success can create barriers to appropriate opioid administration (2,4,5).With multiple medications, therapies, and nutritional supplements required each day, routine care can be physically and emotionally exhausting for CF patients and family members.Adolescents with CF report a high quality-of-life and they abuse substances less frequently than their healthy counterparts (6). Nonetheless, in this age group, chronic anxiety and depressive disorders are common and treatment adherence routinely declines (6).Common Issues Near the End-of-LifePrediction of short-term mortality is difficult and largely subjective. Most predictive models focus on clinical severity of pulmonary disease using age, FEV1%, BMI, the presence of pancreatic insufficiency, and opportunistic infections as parameters. These models however are designed to stratify lung transplant candidates rather than assist with end-of-life care planning (2,8).The dynamic, chronic, progressive course of CF creates challenges for timing goals-of-care discussions. Periodic planned meetings amongst patient, family, and care team are advised. Single-center studies reinforce that, despite documented need, palliative care consultation is rarely offered until days before death or when lung transplantation becomes contraindicated (7).Do-not-resuscitate (DNR) orders are often not written until the final few days of life. Many patients continue to receive disease-modifying therapies up until the last 24 hours of life (8). Although many disease-specific therapies can be administered in the home setting, most CF patients die in the hospital setting (4). This likely reflects a combination of prognostication challenges, reluctance to abandon aggressive therapies, patient/family preference, and caregiving burdens. CF patients may be uniquely suited to Medicaid ‘concurrent care’ waiver programs in which patients can receive hospice and routine medical care simultaneously (9).Although guidelines are lacking, progressive hypoxic respiratory failure may benefit from long-term oxygen therapy (5). Non-invasive positive pressure ventilation (NIPPV) has a role for hypercapneic respiratory failure, dyspnea management, and, in select candidates, as a bridge to lung transplant. Use of invasive positive pressure ventilation (IPPV) should always involve clear discussions around therapeutic options and goals-of-care (7).In the past, intensive care for CF patients was generally considered futile. More recently, ICU outcomes have improved, particularly for patients requiring NIPPV (as opposed to IPPV), and for patients who are candidates for lung transplantation (5,7). Long-term outcomes for respiratory failure requiring IPPV remain dismal however, and intensive care management may commit many patients to eventual end-of-life care in the ICU setting.Common symptoms at the end of life include dyspnea, fatigue, anxiety, anorexia, pain, and cough (seeFast Facts #27, 199, 200). Care providers must balance benefit vs. burden of disease-specific treatments such as nebulized medications, NIPPV, and chest physiotherapy (5,7).Patients who survive multiple episodes of acute respiratory failure may come to overestimate their resilience, making appropriate goals-of-care discussions or end-of-life care planning more difficult (5,6).Key teaching pointsPulmonary involvement in CF is the most common cause of morbidity and mortality in people affected by this disease. Symptoms such as dyspnea, anxiety, cough, and pain commonly interfere with CF patients’ quality-of-life. For some patients, lung transplantation offers hope of improved survival and quality-of-life. However, most will die of their disease in the hospital setting.Accurate temporal prognostication in CF is challenging. However, the natural history of CF without transplantation is well-established and patients and families should be prepared for the physical and emotional challenges of end-stage CF, including end-of-life decision-making, even without a precise estimation of survival time.ReferencesBarr HL, Britton J, Smyth AR, et al. Association between socioeconomic status, sex, and age at death from cystic fibrosis in England and Wales (1959 to 2008): cross sectional study.BMJ. 2011; 343:d4662.Buzzetti R, et al, Validation of a predictive survival model in Italian patients with cystic fibrosis,J Cyst Fibros. 2012;11(1):24-9. doi:10.1016/j.jcf.2011.08.007Ravilly S, Robinson W, Suresh S, Wohl ME, Berde CB. Chronic pain in cystic fibrosis.Pediatrics . 1996; 98:741-747.Hayes M, Yaster M, Haythornthwaite J, et al. Pain is a common problem affecting clinical outcomes in adults with cystic fibrosis.Chest. 2011; 140(6):1598-1603. doi:10.1378/chest.11-0132Sands D, Repetto T, Dupont LJ, et al. End of life care for patients with cystic fibrosis.J Cyst Fibros. 2011; (10)2:S37-S44.Ernst MM, Johnson MC, Stark LJ. Developmental and psychosocial issues in cystic fibrosis.Pediatr Clin N Am. 2011; 58:865–885.Robinson WM. Palliative and end-of-life care in cystic fibrosis: what we know and what we need to know.Curr Opin Pulm Med . 2009; 15(6):621-5.Jackson AD, Daly L, Kelleher C, et al. The application of current lifetable methods to compare cystic fibrosis median survival internationally is limited.J Cyst Fibros. 2011; (10):62-65.Rau J. New law could help hospice patients continue aggressive medical treatments.Kaiser Health News. May 10, 2010. Available at:http://www.kaiserhealthnews.org . Accessed: August 7, 2012.Authors’ Affiliations: National Human Genome Research Institute, Bethesda, MD (JEV); Clinical Center, National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, MD (HG).
#266-Consultation Etiquette in Palliative CareAuthors: Charles F von Gunten MD, PhD and David E Weissman MDBackground There are generally agreed upon rules for consultation (just as there are in social life) that can have profound consequences if they are breached. For those just starting to provide consultation services, it is wise to follow the rules until you develop enough familiarity to know when they can be breached. ThisFast Fact reviews the rules of consultation etiquette for palliative care clinicians.1) Remember your stakeholders. Although the focus of the consultation is a patient/family issue, your primary stakeholder is the attending physician that requested the consultation. Unhappy referring physicians mean fewer palliative care consultations!2) Make contact/clarify request. Before you see the patient, contact the referring service to acknowledge that you received the request and to clarify the nature of the request. Determine what questions the managing service wants answered. The phrasing of this is important. ‘Please tell me a little about Patient X so we can be most helpful to you’ is an excellent open-ended query. Determine if there are areas that are 'off-limits' and find out who the consulting team should talk with following your assessment – the referring clinicians or someone else on the care team. Remember, no matter what is written in the chart, the real story exceeds what is written, and the referring clinicians often have concerns/needs that are not evident from the chart. Particularly for palliative care consultations, this has an important secondary importance; in telling you about the patient, the service will receive emotional support in the telling the story. Be quiet and actively listen; acknowledge the underlying distress.Cultural corollary: insome institutions the rank of the person calling should match or exceed the rank of the person called. Strictly applied, for instance, an attending speaks to an attending. This is not true of all institutions or physicians, but it is wise to know your local culture. When in doubt, or conflict occurs, following the cultural corollary of your institution connotes respect.3)Negotiate roles. Many referring clinicians will want the palliative care service to play an ongoing role in the management of the patient and family. This may range from providing information and counseling, to actively managing symptoms including writing medication orders, to assuming principal care for the patient and family. Others will want the palliative care service to maintain a strictly consulting role while the primary service implements recommendations.4) See the patient & gather your own data. This includes reviewing the medical record, pertinent laboratory and diagnostic tests, interviewing the patient and family, examining the patient, and offering information and counseling if that was part of the nature of the request.5) Call the referring service. Before you write in the chart, call the referring service with details of your findings and recommendations. With experience and familiarity with frequent referrers, this step may not be necessary. If appropriate, contact other consultants and clinicians involved with the patient (housestaff, nurses, discharge planners, etc.).Additional TipsBrevity (in general, try to limit your recommendations to < 5) andspecificity (e.g., exact morphine dose/route/schedule) are important to both communicate your key messages and increase the likelihood that your recommendations will be acted upon.Plan ahead – you are often in the best position to recognize likely future needs beyond the hospitalization; plan ahead to meet expected symptom control and other patient/family needs. Helping to expedite and simplify patient discharge is an easy and high-yield way of demonstrating your service’s value to referring clinicians.Honor turf – you may be one of many consultants; when in doubt about the expectations and plans of the referring clinician, clarify by personal contact.Be accessible – a referring physician or service needs to know how to reach you easily. He or she will be put off if they can't reach your service. Indicate how you can be reached in your consult note.Be responsive – acknowledge receipt of the request as immediately as possible and plan to see the patient the same day or within 24 hours. If unable to do this, contact the referring clinician directly to discuss. ReferencesCohn SL. The role of the medical consultant.Med Clin N Am. 2003;.87:1–6.Goldman L, Lee T, Rudd P. Ten commandments for effective consultations.Arch Intern Med . 1983; 143(9):1753–5.Morrison RS, Meier DE. Clinical practice. Palliative care.N Engl J Med . 2004; 350(25):2582–90.Weissman DE. Consultation in palliative medicine.Arch Intern Med . 1997; 157(7):733–7.Salerno SM, et al. Principles of effective consultation: an update for the 21st century consultant.Arch Int Med . 2007; 167:271-275.Consultation Etiquette E-Learning Course. CAPC Campus On-Line. Center to Advance Palliative Care. Available at:http://campus.capc.org/ .Authors’ Affiliations: VP for Medical Affairs, Hospice & Palliative Care, Kobacker House, OhioHealth, Columbus, OH (CvG); Medical College of Wisconsin, Milwaukee, WI (DEW).
#267-Writing the Consultation NoteAuthors: Charles F von Gunten MD, PhD and David E Weissman MDBackground Documentation the consultation serves to: a) communicate your findings, b) document the service you provided and c) support yourcoding and billing activity. InFast Fact#266, the basic principles of consultation ettiquete were reviewed as they apply to palliative care clinicians. ThisFast Fact reviews key elements of the palliative care consutation note.1) Reason for ConsultationI was asked to see this 87 year old man for problems related to shortness of breath and setting goals-of-care by Dr. Bligh. An older etiquette form that is appreciated is to begin the consultation note with the phrase:Thank you for asking me to see this….2) Summarize the Case, including your activitiesI have reviewed the medical record and the chest radiographs, interviewed the patient and family, and examined the patient. The following aspects are pertinent:Pertinent Current and Past HistoryPertinent Social/Family/Spiritual HistoryPertinent Medications and their effectsPertinent Review of SystemsPertinent Examination FindingsPertinent lab/x-ray/pathologyPrognosis/Advance care planning/Goal setting information3) Your Assessment Clearly and prominently indicate your assessment. This is where those who want to know 'the bottom line' will look first. It is common practice in some institutions to put your assessment and recommendations at the very top of the note for readability. Encapsulate the case from your point of view. This should be as concise as possible, however it should contain adequate accounting of your medical decision making, particularly if your discussion could be surprising or unfamiliar to other clinicians (e.g., hospice eligibility in ‘borderline’ cases, opioid hyperalgesia).This 87 year old man has dyspnea due to a combination of COPD and metastatic adenocarcinoma of the lung. He understands his diagnosis and prognosis. He and his wife made it quite clear that they do not want to suffer and would like to be cared for at home. They would like no heroic or extraordinary measures used to keep him alive. They agree to a hospice plan of care. 4) Recommendations Number, bullet, and/orbold your recommendations; don't bury them in a dense paragraph.Initiate oral morphine 5 mg po q 1h to relieve dyspnea Initiate dexamethasone 8 mg orally q am to diminish inflammation and add to relief of dyspnea Enter a DNR order in the chart and give the patient documentation to take with him at the time of discharge. Refer the patient to Pershing Hospice which serves the area where he lives. Their telephone number is 111-222-2222. We would be happy to arrange this if you would like. 5) Closure Indicate with whom you have discussed the recommendations and your plan for following-up the patient; conclude with the conventional etiquette.I have discussed these recommendations with Dr. Bligh who concurs. Further, I have discussed my findings with the housestaff, nursing and social work staff caring for this gentleman. Dr. Bligh has asked us to continue to follow this patient during his hospitalization to supervise titration of morphine and to continue to provide counseling and information. If you need us, it is best to contact our nurse, Betty Blythe, RN at 444-4444, Thank you for permitting us to participate in the care of this patient. 6) Signature Clearly indicate your name and a way that the service can contact you.Charles Feelbetter, MD; Office 333-3333; Pager 111-1111 7) Coding and Billing For coding and billing purposes, if you are using time to justify the level of coding, you should include start/stop times of your face to face patient contact (seeFast Fact #48).I spent a total of 90 minutes on this consultation. 50 minutes of this time was spent in counseling and information giving to the patient and his wife, starting at 1530 and ending at 1620.ReferencesCampbell M, Dahlin C. Advanced practice palliative nursing: a guide to practice and business issues. Hospice and Palliative Nurses Association; Pittsburgh, PA: 2008. Available from:http://www.hpna.org/Item_Details.aspx?ItemNo=978-1-934654-05-7 .Buppert C. Billing for Nurse Practitioner Service -- Update 2007: Guidelines for NPs, Physicians, Employers, and Insurers. Medscape Nurses. Available at:http://www.medscape.org/viewprogram/7767 . Accessed August 3, 2012.von Gunten CF, Ferris FD, Kirschner C, Emanuel LL. Coding and reimbursement mechanisms for physician services in hospice and palliative care.J Palliat Med . 2000; 3:157-64.Billing and Coding E-Learning Course. CAPC Campus On-Line. Center to Advance Palliative Care. http://campus.capc.org /.Authors’ Affiliations: VP for Medical Affairs, Hospice & Palliative Care, Kobacker House, OhioHealth, Columbus, OH (CvG); Medical College of Wisconsin, Milwaukee, WI (DEW).
#268 Low-Dose Buprenorphine Patch for PainAuthors: Julie W Childers MD and Robert Arnold MDBackground: Buprenorphine is an opioid agonist/antagonist that is used sublingually for opioid addiction treatment (seeFast Fact #221). In 2010, the Food and Drug Administration approved a low-dose buprenorphine transdermal system (the ‘Butrans®’ patch) for use in the United States. ThisFast Fact reviews the use of buprenorphine for pain, with an emphasis on the new low-dose transdermal patch.Pharmacology: Buprenorphine is a partial agonist at the mu-opioid receptor and an antagonist at the kappa- and delta- opioid receptors. It provides analgesia with decreased incidence of sedation, euphoria and respiratory depression compared to other opioids (1). A ceiling effect for pain relief, previously identified in animals and humans, hasnot been found at the lower doses used for analgesia. In doses available transdermally (up to 70 mcg/hour), buprenorphine does not antagonize the effect of other opioids used for breakthrough pain (2).Equianalgesic Ratios : Buprenorphine is effective parenterally for post-operative pain; 0.3 mg is equianalgesic to 10 mg IV morphine. A trial of sublingual buprenorphine for pain (an off-label use in the U.S.) found that 0.4 mg is as effective for acute pain as 5 mg IV morphine (3). The transdermal buprenorphine to oral morphine equianalgesic ratio has been reported to be between 1:70 to 1:115 (e.g., 100 mg of oral morphine/24 hours ≈ 0.87-1.42 mg transdermal buprenorphine/24hr ≈ 36-59 mcg/hr transdermal buprenorphine). The transdermal buprenorphine:fentanyl ratio is reported to be 0.8 mcg buprenorphine to 0.6 mcg fentanyl (4) (e.g., 20 mcg/hour of transdermal buprenorphine is approximately equivalent to 15 mcg/hour of transdermal fentanyl).Using the Low-Dose Buprenorphine Patch: The U.S. formulation of the buprenorphine transdermal system is recommended for opioid tolerant patients requiring up to 80 mg/day of oral morphine equivalents. The patch is available in strengths of 5, 10, and 20 mcg/hour, and is worn for seven days at a time. Buprenorphine reaches a steady state level 48 hours after application of the first patch, and, with a terminal half-life of 26 hours, levels decline slowly after patch removal. Withdrawal symptoms tend to be milder than with other long-acting opioids (5). Use of more than one patch at a time is not recommended due to risk of QT prolongation, with a mean QTc prolongation of 9.2 ms at a dose of 40 mcg/hour (6).Note: in Europe doses between 70-210 mcg/hour have been used for cancer pain with a different patch system (7).Initiating the Low-Dose Buprenorphine Patch (Manufacturer’s Recommendations) (6)Baseline Daily Oral Morphine EquivalentStarting Patch Dose<30 mg 5 mcg/hour 30-80 mg 10 mcg/hour >80 mg/day Usage not recommended The 20 mcg/hour patch is not intended for initial use, but patients accustomed to the patch may be titrated to this dose.Clinical Applications: The buprenorphine patch has shown to be non-inferior to other opioids in studies of chronic lower back pain, osteoarthritis, and cancer pain (8). Because of its kappa antagonism, it has theoretical advantages in the treatment of neuropathic pain, though evidence for this is limited to case reports (9, 10). It has also been shown experimentally to have antihyperalgesic effects (11). Other advantages of buprenorphine include a decreased risk of respiratory depression and a lack of accumulation in renal failure, including in hemodialysis patients (12). Some studies have reported less constipation, nausea, and sedation with buprenorphine (13,14). In a trial comparing transdermal buprenorphine in patients over 65 with younger patients, older patients had equivalent analgesia without any differences in accumulation of buprenorphine or its metabolites (15).Cost : The average wholesale price (in 2011) for a month’s supply of four 10 mcg patches is $226.Summary: The low-dose transdermal buprenorphine patch is effective for mild to moderate chronic pain, both malignant and nonmalignant. However, given the dose limitations of the buprenorphine patch as marketed in the U.S., as well as the cost, the usefulness of this medication for most patients and clinicians is very limited. The low-dose buprenorphine patch may be a reasonable second- or third-line option in patients with low opioid requirements who experience intolerable side effects with other opioids.ReferencesJohnson RE, Fudula PJ, Payne R. Buprenorphine: considerations for pain management.J Pain Symptom Manage. 2005; 29:297-326.Mercadante S ,Villari P ,Ferrera P , et al. Safety and effectiveness of intravenous morphine for episodic breakthrough pain in patients receiving transdermal buprenorphine.J Pain Symptom Manage. 2006;32:175-9.Jalili M ,Fathi M ,Moradi-Lakeh M ,Zehtabchi S . Sublingual Buprenorphine in Acute Pain Management: A Double-Blind Randomized Clinical Trial.Ann Emerg Med. 2012; 59:276-80.PMID 22115823 .Mercadante S ,Casuccio A ,Tirelli W ,Giarratano A . Equipotent doses to switch from high doses of opioids to transdermal buprenorphine. Support Care Cancer. 2009; 17: 715-8.Jasinski DR ,Pevnick JS ,Griffith JD . Human pharmacology and abuse potential of the analgesic buprenorphine: a potential agent for treating narcotic addiction. Arch Gen Psychiatry. 1978;35: 501-16.Purdue Pharma. Available at:http://www.purduepharma.com/pi/prescription/ButransPI.htm . Accessed February 23, 2012.Mercadante S ,Ferrera P ,Villari P . Is there a ceiling effect of transdermal buprenorphine? Preliminary data in cancer patients. Support Care Cancer . 2007;15: 441-4.Pergolizzi JV Jr ,Mercadante S ,Echaburu AV , et al. The role of transdermal buprenorphine in the treatment of cancer pain: an expert panel consensus.Curr Med Res Opin. 2009; 25:1517-28.Rodriguez-Lopez M. Transdermal buprenorphine in the management of neuropathic pain.Rev Soc Esp Dolor. 2004;11(Suppl V):11-21.Penza P, Campanella A, Martini A, et al. Short- and intermediate-term efficacy of buprenorphine TDS in chronic painful neuropathies.J Peripher Nerv Syst . 2008;13: 283-288.Koppert W, Ihmsen H, Körber N, et al. Different profiles of buprenorphine-induced hyperalgesia and antihyperalgesia in a human pain model.Pain . 2005;118: 15-22.Pergolizzi J ,Aloisi AM ,Dahan A , et al. Current knowledge of buprenorphine and its unique pharmacological profile. Pain Pract. 2010;10: 428-50.Likar R, Vadlau EM, Breschan C, Kager I, Korak-Leiter M, Ziervogel G. Comparable analgesic efficacy of transdermal buprenorphine in patients over and under 65 years of age.Clin J Pain. 2008;24:536-43.Bach V, Kamp-Jensen M, Jensen NH, et al. Buprenorphine and sustained release morphine – effect and side-effects in chronic use.The Pain Clinic . 1991;4:87–93.R. Likar, H. Kayser and R. Sittl. Long-term management of chronic pain with transdermal buprenorphine: a multicenter, open-label, follow-up study in patients from three short-term clinical trials.Clin Ther . 2006; 28: 943–52.Conflicts of Interest Statement: The authors have no relevant conflicts of interest to disclose.Authors’ Affiliation: University of Pittsburgh Medical Center, Pittsburgh, PA.
#269 Deactivation of a Left Ventricular Assist Device at the End of LifeAuthors: Ellin F Gafford MD, Angela J Luckhardt RN, CNS, and Keith M Swetz MD, MAIntroduction The increased use of left ventricular assist devices (LVADs) is expected, particularly as destination therapy for patients with advanced heart failure who are not transplant candidates.Fast Fact #205 discusses LVAD technology in general. ThisFast Fact discusses important considerations at the time of LVAD deactivation.Note: published clinical outcomes with LVAD therapy have improved further after the initial publication ofFast Fact #205, please refer to the updated 2nd Edition of #205 for current information (1 ). A general review of contemporary LVAD management, including images regarding common devices currently in use can be found in Reference (2 ). A futureFast Fact will address advance care planning for the patient with an LVAD.Common clinical scenarios leading to LVAD deactivation Clinical situations leading to LVAD deactivation include catastrophic complications of the LVAD (e.g. stroke, sepsis and multiorgan failure); poor quality of life despite LVAD treatment (e.g. chronic infections, intolerance of or a decision to forego hemodialysis); and developing serious secondary comorbidities (e.g. cancer, dementia) (3 ,4 ). As with other life-sustaining treatments, patients may request withdrawal of life-sustaining treatments that are no longer consistent with their goals of care.Important Process Steps in Deactivating LVADsSince part of the device is implanted within the patient, an LVAD is ‘turned-off,’ akin to deactivating an implantable defibrillator. However, LVADs have an external power source and associated controlling unit which are removed from a patient, analogous to removing a ventilator.The process regarding LVAD deactivation should be clearly outlined to and understood by those who are participating.Any patient/family or professional ethical concerns should be addressed. Families and loved ones should have ample opportunities for visitation. Family members’ presence can be based on patient preferences, and a description of what can be expected should be shared with loved ones.DNR and DNI status should be confirmed and documented in the chart and orders, as well as the goals of care and overall medical plan of care. Survival after LVAD deactivation at the end-of-life ranges from a few minutes to a few days (5 ). Providers should carefully explain this variability to families as it can be upsetting if a patient liveslonger orshorter than what family expects.Many patients will also be on other forms of life-sustaining treatments such as renal replacement therapy, vasopressors, tube feeds, implantable cardioverter-defibrillators (seeFast Fact #112), and mechanical ventilation that generally should be discontinued at the time of LVAD deactivation. Once the care goals are clear, it is usually best to make direct recommendations to the patient/family about the medical plan of care including what treatments should be stopped, as opposed to asking families treatment-by-treatment what they want done. Families should be reassured that patients can be kept comfortable without such treatments, however at times families will request LVAD discontinuation while continuing mechanical ventilation and/or nutrition/hydration.All non-symptom-directed monitoring should be discontinued.Practical LVAD Deactivation TipsClinicians should think of LVAD deactivation as analogous to ventilator withdrawal. They should be prepared to prevent and treat the potentially rapid onset of dyspnea/labored respirations, agitation, or other signs of discomfort. Pharmacologic principles are similar to ventilator withdrawal – seeFast Facts#33, 34.Work closely with the individual/s in your institution responsible for LVAD management, such as the LVAD nurse coordinators. There are many different LVAD models which have different steps in their deactivation.Familiarity with the alarm functions of LVAD devices, and how to turn them off, is critical to prevent unsettling alarming during what is hoped to be a peaceful and intimate process for patients and loved ones. Tips to deactivate the alarms for the HeartMate II device, one of the most commonly implanted adult LVAD devices today, are included in the box below.Once the LVAD is deactivated, cardiovascular circulation may greatly diminish. Clinicians should be aware of this as they provide symptom medications, and strongly consider bolusing with comfort medications just prior to deactivation to ensure adequate circulation of the drugs. Due to diminished drug circulation, the time to peak effect of an opioid or benzodiazepine bolus may be delayed after LVAD discontinuation.References1. Slaughter MS, Rogers JG, Milano CA, et al. Advanced heart failure treated with continuous-flow left ventricular assist device.N Engl J Med . 2009; 361:2241-2251.2. Slaughter MS, Pagani FD, Rogers JG, et al. Clinical management of continuous-flow left ventricular assist devices in advanced heart failure.J Heart Lung Transplant . 2010; 29:S1-39.3. Swetz KM, Freeman MR, AbouEzzeddine OF, et al. Palliative medicine consultation for preparedness planning in patients receiving left ventricular assist devices as destination therapy.Mayo Clin Proc . 2011; 86:493-500.4. Swetz KM, Ottenberg AL, Freeman MR, Mueller PS. Palliative care and end-of-life issues in patients treated with left ventricular assist devices as destination therapy.Curr Heart Fail Rep . 2011; 8:212-218.5. Brush S, Budge D, Alharethi R, et al. End-of-life decision making and implementation in recipients of a destination left ventricular assist device.J Heart Lung Transplant . 2010; 29:1337-1341. Box: Basic Deactivation Sequence Checklist for HeartMate II LVADUnscrew small black nickel-sized battery in “System Driver” (also called controller) to disable back-up alarms. Press alarm silence button on controller. Remove power from controller by removing both cables coming from the main power base unit (simultaneous removal of both cables will limit alarms). Detach controller from patient (cord going from LVAD driveline exiting patient to the controller).If deactivation occurs sequentially and not simultaneously, there is the risk of the device alarming due to low power or low flow, which can be distressing to families. Authors’ Affiliations:Ohio State College of Medicine, Columbus, OH (EFG); Mayo Clinic, Rochester, MN (AJL, KMS).
#270 Pain in Sickle Cell Disease Authors: Caterina P Minniti MD, Kit Lu MD, Hunter Groninger MD Background Sickle cell disease (SCD) is one of the most common genetic disorders in the world. It is recessively inherited and caused by a mutation in the hemoglobin β-globin chain gene (1). An estimated 80,000-100,000 people have SCD in North America; 1 in 600 African-Americans carries the sickle gene. This Fast Fact discusses issues specific to management of acute and chronic pain in SCD. Mechanism of Disease Polymerization of deoxy-sickle hemoglobin injures the erythrocyte, leading to premature extravascular and intravascular hemolysis (1,2). Acute and chronic vascular endothelial changes facilitate adhesion of sickle erythrocytes and other blood cells, release of inflammatory mediators, vaso-occlusion, and end-organ damage, ultimately shortening the life span of affected individuals (2). Disease Treatment Disease treatment involves preventive care and supportive therapies, including hydration, judicious use of blood transfusions, and prophylactic antibiotics. The only FDA-approved therapy for SCD, hydroxyurea, increases levels of fetal hemoglobin and total hemoglobin and reduces frequency of pain crises, blood transfusions, and acute chest syndrome (ACS) episodes (3). In select patients with severe disease, hematopoietic stem cell transplantation can be curative (4). Pain and Vaso-occlusive Crises As fetal hemoglobin production diminishes around 6 months of age, painful vaso-occlusive crises (VOC) begin and recur with great variability in frequency and severity (5). Higher hematocrit, lower fetal hemoglobin, and presence of α-thalassemia trait are associated with increased rates of VOC. While many episodes have no clear trigger, common identifiable precipitants include dehydration, infections, psychological stress, menses, and weather changes. Recent data show one-third of patients having no VOCs for a year, and 17% having more than 3, with a 30-day re-hospitalization rate of 33% (6). Frequent VOCs are associated with early mortality, and can lead to chronic and intractable pain syndromes, greatly impacting sleep, mood, and social and physical functioning (7). Management of the Acute Pain Crisis Successful pain management in VOCs depends on patient and clinician establishing trust, clearly defined expectations, and reasonable clinical goals (8). Negative provider attitudes towards acute pain in SCD, as well as misperception of pain behaviors as red flags for analgesic addiction, lead to under-treatment of pain (8). Clinicians more familiar with managing acute pain crises are more likely to believe patients’ pain ratings (8). Pain crises last on average 9-11 days for hospitalized adults (4-5 days in pediatric populations) (9). The physical exam can reveal erythematous, swollen, and tender superficial bony areas (e.g., sternum, spine, ribs, wrists) but more often offers nonspecific findings (e.g. soft, tender abdomen). Although patients may have ‘target’ joints or areas of pain recurrence, they commonly report shift in locations of pain during a hospitalization. Management consists of supportive care with fluid hydration and aggressive pain control (1,10). Rapid initiation and titration of opioid therapies remains a cornerstone for managing acute VOC pain (9,11). If IV access is challenging, parenteral opioids may easily be delivered subcutaneously. One small, randomized trial showed patient-controlled analgesia use was associated with similar analgesia but lower overall opioid use and side-effects compared to continuous infusion (12). Earlier retrospective studies linking morphine use to development of ACS have been refuted (13). Many patients’ VOC pain is predictable enough to establish patient-specific pain protocols, which give dosing guidelines to clinicians such as emergency department staff who may not be familiar with the patient. Non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs (NSAIDs) may enhance relief and recovery (10), although large randomized controlled trials are lacking. There is no proven analgesic benefit to corticosteroids, neuropathic adjuvant agents, or red blood cell transfusions. While supplemental oxygen has no proven therapeutic role in patients with normal saturations, hypoxia in VOC may herald serious complications (e.g. ACS, stroke, pulmonary embolism). Incentive spirometry may prevent pulmonary complications leading to ACS (14). Low-dose intravenous naloxone infusion may relieve opioid-induced pruritis without affecting pain control. (15) Chronic Pain in SCD Chronic pain in SCD is widespread and demonstrated to negatively impact functional status and QOL (16). Nearly 1/3 patients report pain on most days, and most pain exacerbations occur outside of health care settings (17). Although no evidence supports higher rates of opioid addiction in SCD patients compared with the general population (18), prescriber fears about addiction remain a barrier to adequate opioid administration (18). Tensions between SCD patients and clinicians around opioid prescribing more likely reflect pseudoaddiction (18,19). Chronic pain can develop from objective disease complications (leg ulcers, avascular necrosis) or a less well-understood transformation from persistent repeated acute VOCs into a chronic pain syndrome (12). Permanent opioid therapy is necessary for some patients. Although specific guidelines are lacking, experts recommend an interdisciplinary approach to chronic pain management, and combining intervention modalities, including both pharmacologic (e.g. acetaminophen, NSAIDs, anticonvulsants, tricyclic antidepressants, judicious use of opioids) and non-pharmacologic treatments (e.g. heat, massage, relaxation therapies, distraction, self-hypnosis, prayer/meditation, and acupuncture) (8,16). References Steinberg MH. Sickle Cell Disease. Ann Intern Med. 2011; 155:ITC3-1. Kato GJ, Gladwin MT, Steinberg MH. Deconstructing sickle cell disease: Reappraisal of the role of hemolysis in the development of clinical subphenotypes. Blood Rev . 2007; 21:37-47. Lanzkron S, Strouse JJ, Wilson R, et al. Systematic Review: Hydroxyurea for the Treatment of Adults with Sickle Cell Disease. Ann Intern Med. 2008; 148:939-55. Bolaños-Meade J, Brodsky RA. Blood and marrow transplantation for sickle cell disease: overcoming barriers to success. Curr Op Oncol . 2009; 21:158-61. DOI: 10.1097/CCO.0b013e328324ba04. Platt OS, Thorington BD,Brambilla DJ, et al. Pain in Sickle Cell Disease -- Rates and Risk Factors. N Engl J Med. 1991; 325:11-16. Brousseau DC, Pamela L, et al. Acute Care Utilization and Rehospitalizations for Sickle Cell Disease. JAMA. 2010 303(13):1288-1294. Darbari DS, Onyekwere O, Nouraie M, et al. Markers of severe vaso-occlusive painful episode frequency in children and adolescents with sickle cell anemia. J Pediatr. 2012;160(2):286-90. Elander J, Beach MC, Haywood C Jr. Respect, trust, and the management of sickle cell disease pain in hospital: comparative analysis of concern-raising behaviors, preliminary model, and agenda for international collaborative research to inform practice. Ethn Health. 2011 Aug-Oct; 16(4-5):405-21. Ballas SK. Update on Pain Management in Sickle Cell Disease. Hemoglobin. 2011; 35:520-9. Dunlop R, Bennett KCLB. Pain management for sickle cell dise ase in chil dren and adults. Cochrane Database of Systematic Reviews . 2006, Issue 2. Art. No.: CD003350. DOI: 10.1002/ 14651858.CD003350.pub2. Rees DC, Olujohungbe AD, Parker NE, et al. Guidelines for the management of the acute painful crisis in sickle cell disease. Br J Haematol. 2003; 120:744-52. van Beers EJ, van Tuijn CFJ, Nieuwkerk PT, et al. Patient-controlled analgesia versus continuous infusion of morphine during vaso-occlusive crisis in sickle cell disease, a randomized controlled trial. Am J Hematol. 2007; 82:955–960. Finkelstein Y, Schechter T, Garcia-Bournissen F, et al. Is morphine exposure associated with acute chest syndrome in children with vaso-occlusive crisis of sickle cell disease? A 6-year case-crossover study. Clin Ther . 2007; 29: 2738–2743. Bellet PS, Kalinyak KA, Shukla R, et al. Incentive Spirometry to Prevent Acute Pulmonary Complications in Sickle Cell Diseases. N Engl J Med. 1995; 333:699-703. Kjellberg F, Tramèr MR. Pharmacological control of opioid-induced pruritus: a quantitative systematic review of randomized trials. Eur J Anaesthesiol. 2001; 18(6):346. Taylor LE, Stotts NA, et al. A review of the literature on the multiple dimensions of chronic pain in adults with sickle cell disease. J Pain Symptom Manage. 2010; 40(3):416-35. Smith WR, Penberthy LT, Bovbjerg VE, et al. Daily assessment of pain in adults with sickle cell disease. Ann Intern Med . 2008; 148:94–101. Solomon LR. Treatment and prevention of pain due to vaso-occlusive crises in adults with sickle-cell disease: an educational void. Blood . 2008; 111(3):997-1003. Lusher J, Elander J, Bevan D, Telfer P, Burton B. Analgesic addiction and pseudoaddiction in painful chronic illness. Clin J Pain. 2006; 22(3):316-324. Authors Affiliations: National Heart, Lung, and Blood Institute, Bethesda, MD (CM, KL); National Institutes of Health Clinical Center, Bethesda, MD (HG) 
#271 Anti-Epileptic Drugs for Pain Authors: Seth Hepner and René Claxton MD Introduction Tri-cyclic antidepressants (TCAs), serotonin-norepinephrine reuptake inhibitors (SNRIs) and anti-epileptic drugs (AEDs) are the mainstays of adjuvant therapy for neuropathic pain. For more information on the use of antidepressants and a more in-depth look at gabapentin see Fast Facts #187 and #49, respectively. This Fast Fact reviews the evidence for the use of AEDs in the treatment of neuropathic pain. Due to lack of head-to-head data, evidence is presented as numbers needed to treat (NNT) and numbers needed to harm (NNH). For instance, an NNT of 5 for 50% pain reduction means for every 5 patients treated with a drug, only 1 of them would achieve a 50% reduction in pain. All data presented and doses mentioned are for adults. Data below are based on investigations of patients with chronic pain. Given the paucity of research about the use of adjuvants for pain management in patients with life-limiting illnesses, many clinicians empirically extrapolate available data to palliative care patients. Gabapentin is effective in treating central and peripheral neuropathic pain. According to a 2011 Cochrane review of the effect of gabapentin on chronic neuropathic conditions (including post-herpetic neuralgia, painful diabetic neuropathy, mixed neuropathic pain), the NNT is 5.8 (4.8-7.2) to achieve at least moderate benefit. This NNT is more conservative than those previously published due to better definitions of efficacy outcomes and an increased number of participants and studies evaluated. Adverse effects are frequent, usually tolerable and include drowsiness, dizziness and edema (1). Gabapentin should be dose adjusted for renal dysfunction. It should be withdrawn gradually to avoid precipitating seizures. Maximum dose is 3,600 mg/day (2). Pregabalin is effective in treating peripheral and central neuropathic pain. Its effectiveness increases as the dose approaches 600 mg/day. Based on a recent meta-analysis, at a dose of 600 mg/day, the NNT to decrease pain by 50% for the following conditions is: 3.9 (range 3.1-5.1) for post-herpetic neuralgia; 5.0 (range 4.0-6.6) for diabetic neuropathy; and 5.6 (range 3.5-14) for central neuropathic pain. There was no difference in incidence of side effects among participants taking pregabalin vs placebo and no indication of a dose response to side-effects (3). Dosing starts at 150 mg/day in divided doses either twice or three times daily (2). Carbamazepine is effective in treating neuropathic pain, specifically trigeminal neuralgia, but is not considered first-line therapy due to its adverse effects. A 2011 meta-analysis focused on the use of carbamazepine for chronic neuropathic pain reported that carbamazepine reduced pain compared to placebo (NNT of 1.7, range 1.5-2.0). However, adverse events occur frequently: NNH = 2.6, range 2.1-3.5 (4). Common side effects include leukocytosis, thrombocytopenia, dizziness, drowsiness, ataxia, nausea/vomiting and blurred vision. Additionally, there is a risk of agranulocytosis, aplastic anemia, and Stevens Johnson syndrome. Laboratory tests (BUN, complete blood count, sodium, liver function tests, urinalysis) and serum drug levels should be checked at baseline and during treatment. Dosing starts at 100-200 mg twice a day and is titrated up by 200 mg/day every 3 – 5 days until pain relief is achieved. Maximum dose is 1,200 mg/day (2). Oxcarbazepine is an analogue of carbemazepine which is equally effective at treating trigeminal neuralgia as carbemazepine (5) but with fewer side effects (6). Oxcarbazepine can be started at 300 mg twice a day and titrated up by 300 mg/day every 3 days to therapeutic effect. Maximum dose is 2,400 mg/day (2). Valproic acid was evaluated in a 2011 meta-analysis for the treatment of neuropathic pain. There were insufficient data for reliable pooled analysis, and the authors recommend against its use as first line therapy (7). Several small studies (n <60) showed benefit of the use of valproic acid (maximum of 1200 mg/day in divided doses) over placebo in the treatment of diabetic neuropathy (8). However, this data is not convincing as other studies of valproic acid have failed to find an effect (9). Adverse effects include liver function test abnormalities, dizziness, drowsiness and nausea. Maximum dose is 60 mg/kg/day (2). Topiramate has not demonstrated convincing efficacy for painful diabetic neuropathy. In three studies totaling more than 1200 participants, topiramate did not show a statistically significant effect on painful diabetic neuropathy (9). A subsequent smaller randomized controlled trial of 317 patients with diabetic neuropathy showed a benefit to topiramate over placebo with a NNT of 6.9. Serious adverse events thought to be related to topiramate included convulsion and bradycardia plus syncope (10). Additional adverse effects include sedation, nausea, diarrhea and metabolic acidosis (2). Dosing starts at 50 mg/day and can be titrated up to 400 mg/day (10). Lacosamide has weak evidence supporting its use. In a randomized, placebo controlled study of 119 patients with diabetic neuropathy, patients treated with lacosamide (100-400 mg/day) showed a decrease in baseline pain by 2 or more points on an 11-point scale compared to controls treated with placebo, NNT 10.9. Side effects were similar (12). Subsequent trials have failed to show an effect except for the efficacy of a 400 mg dose in subgroup analysis (9). Dosing starts at 50 mg twice daily and can be increased to 400 mg/day. Of note, abrupt discontinuation can precipitate seizures (2). Using other AEDs including phenytoin and levetiracetam is not supported by clinical research. Although there is not strong evidence to support the use of lamotrigine in treating acute or chronic pain at doses of 200-400mg daily, there a single small study (n=92) which demonstrates benefit for patients with painful HIV-related neuropathy (12, 9, 13). Summary TCAs, SNRIs, and the AEDs gabapentin and pregabalin are the best adjuvant analgesics for neuropathic pain. For patients who are intolerant to or who experience pain unresponsive to the above medications, one can consider therapy with carbamazepine, oxcarbazepine, valproic acid, topiramate or lacosamide, However, as these agents are associated with more side effects and lower rates of efficacy,expert consultation is strongly recommended. References Moore RA, Wiffen PJ, Derry S, McQuay HJ. Gabapentin for chronic neuropathic pain and fibromyalgia in adults. Cochrane Database of Systematic Reviews . 2011, Issue3, Art No.: CD007938. DOI: 10.1002/14651858.CD007938.pub2 Micromedex® Healthcare Series [Internet database]. Greenwood Village, Colo: Thomson Reuters (Healthcare) Inc. Updated periodically. Moore RA, Straube S, Wiffen PJ, Derry S, McQuay HJ. Pregabalin for acute and chronic pain in adults. Cochrane Database of Systematic Reviews . 2009, Issue 3. Art. No.: CD007076. DOI: 10.1002/14651858.CD007076.pub2. Wiffen PJ, Derry S, Moore RA, McQuay HJ. Carbamazepine for acute and chronic pain in adults. Cochrane Database of Systematic Reviews. 2011, Issue 1. Art. No.: CD005451. DOI: 10.1002/14651858.CD005451.pub2. Zakrzewska J, Linskey M. Trigeminal Neuralgia. Clinical Evidence. 2009; 3(1207). Retrieved Nov 15, 2011 from http://clinicalevidence.bmj.com/ceweb/conditions/nud/1207/1207.jsp Finnerup NB, et al. Algorithm for neuropathic pain treatment: An evidence based proposal. Pain. 2005; 18:289-305. Gill D, Derry S, Wiffen PJ, Moore RA. Valproic acid and sodium valproate for neuropathic pain and fibromyalgia in adults. Cochrane Database of Systematic Reviews. 2011, Issue 10. Art. No.: CD009183. DOI: 10.1002/14651858.CD009183.pub2. Kochar DK, et al. Sodium valproate for painful diabetic neuropathy: A randomized double-blind placebo-controlled study. Quarterly J Med . 2004; 97:33-8. Finnerup NB, et al. The evidence for pharmacological treatment of neuropathic pain . Pain. 2010; 150: 573-581. Raskin P, et al. Topiramate vs placebo in painful diabetic neuropathy: analgesic and metabolic effects. Neurology. 2004; 63(5):865-73. Rauck RL, et al. Lacosamide in painful diabetic peripheral neuropathy: A phase 2 double blind placebo-controlled study. Clin J Pain . 2007; 23:150-8. Goodyear-Smith F, Halliwell J. Anticonvulsants for neuropathic Pain: gaps in the evidence. Clin J Pain. 2009; 25: 528-536. Wiffen PJ, Derry S, Moore RA. Lamotrigine for acute and chronic pain. Cochrane Database of Systematic Reviews . 2011, Issue 2. Art. No.: CD006044. DOI: 10.1002/14651858.CD006044.pub3. Authors’ Affiliations: University of Pittsburgh Medical Center, Pittsburgh, PA. 
#272 Postherpetic Neuralgia Authors: Shannon Ryan-Cebula MD and Hunter Groninger MD Background Postherpetic neuralgia (PHN) is a syndrome described as zoster-associated pain persisting for more than 3 months after resolution of an initial herpes zoster (HZ) rash (‘shingles’). This Fast Fact discusses PHN. Epidemiology Inconsistencies in diagnosis and data collection make the incidence of HZ and PHN difficult to estimate (1,2). PHN develops rarely in those under 50 years. However, it occurs in 20% of persons 60 to 65 with HZ, and its incidence rises to 30% in persons over 80 years old (1,2). Risk factors for PHN include severe acute shingles-related pain, rash severity (i.e., more than 50 lesions), increasing age, and immunocompromised status (3,4). Pathophysiology In acute HZ, reactivation of the virus from the dorsal root ganglia of spinal or cranial nerves causes inflammation and damage to the affected nerve tissue, resulting in acute pain. Subsequently, primary afferent neurons responding to the acute neuronal damage of zoster reactivation can cause sensitization of the nociceptive dorsal horn neurons, resulting in a prolonged exaggerated response to non-noxious stimuli (1). This central sensitization is thought to be a key mechanism in the development and maintenance of the pain of PHN. Natural History Most HZ patients experience resolution of the rash and acute HZ pain within two months (1). For those who develop PHN, prolonged severe disabling symptoms rarely remain beyond 6 months (5). A small subset may experience irreversible damage to skin and sensory abnormalities that can result in ongoing pain for years (2). For all patients with acute HZ and/or PHN, physical and emotional quality-of-life can be affected (6,7,8). Prevention In adults over 60 years old, live vaccination against the zoster virus reduces overall incidence of HZ by 50% and PHN by two-thirds. It is contraindicated in patients with immune deficiencies (primary or acquired such as patients with leukemia), including patients taking immunosuppressants or high dose corticosteroids (9). Initiating antiviral drugs within 72 hours of rash onset reduces acute and chronic pain associated with HZ. There is no clear benefit to initiation after this window (10,11,12). Best available evidence does not support the routine use of glucocorticoids in preventing PHN (10). Pain management strategies PHN is a quintessential neuropathic pain syndrome and the approach to treatment is similar to other neuropathic syndromes. Recent guidelines cite strong evidence for using tricyclic antidepressants (TCAs), gabapentinoids (gabapentin, pregabalin), opioids, lidocaine 5% patch, and capsaicin 8% patch, to manage PHN (13,14). (See Fast Facts #49, 148, 255, and 271 for more information about these drugs.) Strong evidence also supports combined therapy of gabapentin plus opioids or TCAs (14). Second-line therapies include topical salicylate and topical capsaicin 0.075% cream. To date, evidence demonstrates that epidural steroid injections and acupuncture are no better than placebo (14). While serotonin norepinephrine reuptake inhibitors such as duloxetine are commonly used for neuropathic syndromes (see Fast Fact #187), there are currently no published trials regarding their use for PHN. Cost There is limited literature regarding cost effectiveness among commonly used agents. The following table provides current information regarding starting dose, effective dose, and cost (15). Drug Starting dose (cost in USD/month) Typical effective dose (cost/month) Gabapentin 300mg capsule 900 mg/day ($19) 1800mg/day ($99) Pregabalin 50mg capsule 150 mg/day ($180) 450mg/day ($180) Desipramine 25mg tablet 25 mg/day ($38) 100mg/day ($99) Nortriptyline 50mg capsule 50 mg/day ($20) 75mg/day ($20) Lidocaine 5% patch 1 patch per 12 hours ($217) 1 patch per 12 hours ($217) Capsaicin 8% patch 1 patch per 90 days ($265) 1 patch per 90 days ($265) References Delaney A, Colvin LA, Fallon MT, et al. Postherpetic neuralgia: from preclinical models to the clinic. Neurotherapeutics. 2009; 6:630–637. Watson P. Postherpetic neuralgia. Clin Evid Handbook. June 2011;301-303. Nagasako EM, Johnson RW, Griffin DR, Dworkin RH. Rash severity in herpes zoster: correlates and relationship to postherpetic neuralgia. J Am Acad Dermatol . 2002; 46(6):834. Jung BF, Johnson RW, Griffin DR, Dworkin RH. Risk factors for postherpetic neuralgia in patients with herpes zoster. Neurol. 2004; 62(9):1545-51. Thyregod HG, et al. Natural history of pain following herpes zoster. Pain. 2007; 128:148-156. Johnson RW, Bouhassira D, et al. The impact of herpes zoster and post-herpetic neuralgia on quality of life. BMC Med. 2010; 8:37. Weinke T, Edte A, et al. Impact of herpes zoster and post-herpetic neuralgia on patients’ quality of life: a patient-reported outcomes survey. Z Gesundh Wiss. 2010; 18(4):367-374. Drolet M, Brisson M, Schmader KE, et al. The impact of herpes zoster and postherpetic neuralgia on health related quality of life: a prospective study . CMAJ. 2010; 182(16):1731-6. Center for Disease Control and Prevention (2013). Herpes Zoster Vaccination for Health Care Professionals. Retrieved from http://www.cdc.gov/vaccines/vpd-vac/shingles/hcp-vaccination.htm . Accessed March 6, 2013. Thakur R, Philip AG. Treating herpes zoster and post herpetic neuralgia: an evidence based approach. J Fam Pract . 2012; 61(9 Suppl):S9-15. Dworkin RH, Schmader KE. Epidemiology and natural history of herpes zoster and postherpetic neuralgia. In Watson CPN, Gershon AA, eds. Herpes Zoster and Postherpetic Neuralgia. 2nd ed. New York, NY: Elsevier Press; 2001:39-64. Tyring S, Barbarash RA, Nahlik JE, et al. Famciclovir for the treatment of acute herpes zoster: effects on acute disease and postherpetic neuralgia. A randomized, double-blind, placebo-controlled trial. Ann Intern Med. 1995; 123:89-96. Attal N, Cruccu G, et al. EFNS guidelines on the pharmacological treatment of neuropathic pain: 2010 revision. Eur J Neurol. 2010; 17:1113-1123. Dubinsky RM, Kabbani H, El-Chami Z, Boutwell C, Ali H. An evidence based report of the quality standards subcommitee of the American Academy of Neurology. Neurol. 2004; 63:959-965. Drugstore.com Online Pharmacy. Available at http://www.drugstore.com. Accessed February 22, 2013. Authors’ Affiliations: National Institutes of Health Clinical Center, Bethesda, MD. Conflicts of Interest Disclosure: The authors have not disclosed any relevant conflicts of interest.
#273 Treating Depression after Heart Transplantation Authors: Kaarin Michaelsen, PhD and Robert M. Arnold, MD Background Mood disorders such as depression are some of the most common psychiatric illnesses seen in cardiac transplant patients.1This Fast Factdiscusses major depressive disorder (MDD) after heart transplantation. Note: Many of the drug interactions discussed here are relevant for antidepressant therapy after most solid-organ transplants for which similar immunosuppressants are used. Depression after Cardiac Transplantation Depression in postcardiac transplant patients often does not manifest with ‘‘classic’’ symptoms like anhedonia or tearfulness. Instead, it appears as regression, agitation, withdrawal, or demanding behavior and irritability. (2,3) Depression is more likely if the patient had a mood disorder pretransplant, if he or she has poor social support, if the preoperative expectations were overly optimistic, or if there are significant changes in family and caregiver dynamics posttransplant. (2,3) Pharmacologic Therapy Treating depression in this patient population is challenging due to drug interactions from patients’ anti-rejection medications. For example, cyclosporine and tacrolimus are both metabolized utilizing the hepatic CYP450 3A4 pathway. Inhibitors of this enzyme increase the risk of cyclosporine and tacrolimus toxicity. Conversely, medications that induce 3A4, such as many antidepressants, create subtherapeutic levels of these drugs, increasing the risk of graft rejection. (4) Selective serotonin reuptake inhibitors (SSRIs): SSRIs are the first-line treatment for depression in postcardiac transplant patients, despite having varying degrees of inhibitory effects on P450 enzymes. Citalopram/escitalopram and sertraline are the preferred agents in transplant recipients because of their minimal drug interactions.5 Citalopram/escitalopram also have less risk for posttransplant drug-induced obesity and diabetes.5 Sertraline’s cardioprotective effects (vasodilation of coronary arteries and endothelium protection) may benefit posttransplant patients at risk for myocardial infarction or coronary artery disease. (6,7) SSRIs to be avoided include fluoxetine (compromises steadystate cyclosporine plasma levels), fluvoxamine (has highest 3A4 inhibition among SSRIs), and paroxetine (has highest potential for causing discontinuation syndrome). (5,6) Serotonin norepinephrine reuptake inhibitors: Venlafaxine can be safely used in most transplant recipients, as it has little potential interactions with medications metabolized by the P450 enzyme system. However, doses exceeding 225mg elevate diastolic blood pressure in 9% of treated patients, so it should be used with caution in patients with hypertension. (5) Tricyclic antidepressants (TCAs): The cardiovascular toxicities (conduction delays, QT prolongation, orthostatic hypotension, atrial fibrillation) of TCAs are well known, but some studies have shown that the denervated transplanted heart is less sensitive to those effects than previously thought.6 Nortriptyline is the least likely to produce cardiac side effects.6 TCAs lower the seizure threshold, as do many antirejection drugs. TCAs should be reserved for treating refractory depression in postcardiac patients. (6) Monamine oxidase inhibitors (MAOIs): Because of their propensity to cause hypertensive crises and strong probability of drug-drug interactions, MAOIs are not an option in this population. (5,6) Other drugs: Mirtazipine is a second-line treatment for depression in postcardiac transplant patients and should be reserved for patients suffering from cachexia who may benefit from its appetite stimulating effects. (5) Buproprion has no effect on serotonin reuptake and is a reasonable alternative for cardiac transplant patients suffering major depression who cannot tolerate SSRIs. However, because of its potential to lower the seizure threshold and increase the adverse effects of calcineurin inhibitors on the central nervous system, patients need to be assessed for immunosuppressant-associated neurotoxicity before starting buproprion.5 Nefazodone should be avoided in cardiac transplant patients with depression because of its 3A4 enzyme inhibition. (5) Although up to 30% of transplant patients self-medicate with it, St. John’s Wort (Hypericum perforatum) induces the 3A4 pathway and should be avoided. (5,6) Nonpharmacologic Treatments Transplant patients may have unique issues, such as feeling profound guilt for the donor and/or other patients on the waiting list who did not survive.6 A course of interpersonal psychotherapy, coupled with SSRI therapy, is effective in treating depression in cardiac transplant patients.8,9 Mindfulness-based stress reduction techniques have also been shown to decrease depressive symptoms and increase quality of life in solid-organ transplant patients, retaining benefits for at least one year. (10) Electroconvulsive Therapy(ECT) is well known to be particularly effective in treating major depression refractory to pharmacologic treatment. Although few case reports exist on its use in heart transplant patients, the current evidence indicates that ECT is well tolerated and effective in this group. (6) References Dew MA, DiMartini A: Psychological disorders and distress after adult cardiothoracic transplantation. J Cardiovascular Nurs 2005;20(55):551–556. House RM, Thompson TL: Psychiatric aspects of organ transplantation. JAMA 1988;260(4):535–539. DiMartini A, Crone C, Fireman M, Dew MA: Psychiatric aspects of organ transplantation in critical care. Crit Care Clin 2008;24(4):949–981. Heinrich TW, Marcangelo M: Psychiatric issues in solid organ transplantation. Harvard Rev Psychiatry 2009;17(6): 398–406. Kim J, Phongsamran P, Park S: Use of anti-depressant drugs in transplant recipients. Prog Transplant 2004;14(2):98–104. Paolo Fusar-Poli P, Picchioni M, Martinelli V, et al.: Antidepressive therapies after heart transplantation. J Heart Lung Transplant 2006;25(7):785–793. Hesslinger B, Van de Loo A, et al.: Depression and panic disorder after heart transplantation: Treatment with sertraline. Pharmacopsychiatry 2002;35:31–32. Miller M: Depression after cardiac transplant treated with interpersonal psychotherapy and paroxetine. Am J Psychother 2002;56(4):555–561. Shapiro PA: Nortryptyline treatment of depressed cardiac transplant patients. Am J Psychother 1991;148(3):371–373. Gross CR, Kreitzer MJ, Thomas W, et al.: Mindfulness-based stress reduction for solid organ transplant recipients: A randomized controlled trial. Alt Therapies Health Med 2010;16(5):30–38. Address correspondence to: Robert M. Arnold, MD University of Pittsburgh Division of General Internal Medicine MUH 932 200 Lothrop Street Pittsburgh, PA 15213 E-mail: rabob@pitt.edu 1478 FAST FACTS AND CONCEPTS
#274 The FICA Spiritual History Tool Authors: Christina M. Puchalski, MD Background Spirituality is defined as ‘‘the aspect of humanity that refers to the way individuals seek and express meaning and purpose and the way they experience their connectedness to the moment, to self, to others, to nature, and to the significant or sacred.’’1 Taking a spiritual history is an important patient assessment skill,2 and most American patients report they want medical professionals to be aware of the importance of religion or spirituality to them. Fast Fact #19 presents one approach to taking a spiritual history. This Fast Fact discusses the FICA Spiritual History Toolª (Faith, Importance/Influence, Community, Action/Address in care). Spirituality and Health There is a large body of evidence that demonstrates a relationship between spirituality, religion, and health care outcomes. (3–9) Spirituality and religion are strong contributors to how people cope with illness and suffering. (10–12) Providing for spiritual and religious needs benefits both patients and the health care system. (13) Spiritual History and the Health Care Team A National Consensus Conference (NCC) developed models and guidelines for interprofessional spiritual care. (1) While the conference highlighted the importance of board certified or board-eligible chaplains as the spiritual care experts and essential members of palliative care and other care teams, it recommended that all members of the health care team be responsible for addressing patients’ spiritual issues within the biopsychosocial/spiritual framework. (14) The NCC recommended that all patients should have a spiritual screening or history, that spiritual distress should be diagnosed and attended to, and that validated assessment tools should be used. Taking a Spiritual History: Key Principles Consider spirituality as a potentiality important component of every patient’s life. Spirituality can impact a patient’s quality of life; it is an inherent part of most people’s well-being. Address spirituality at each new visit, at annual examinations, and at follow-up visits if appropriate. Respect a patient’s privacy regarding spiritual beliefs. Be aware of your own beliefs; don’t impose your spiritual/religious beliefs on others. Make referrals to chaplains, spiritual directors, or community resources as appropriate. FICA The FICA Spiritual History Toolª was developed to help health care professionals address spiritual issues with patients. FICA serves as a guide for conversations in the clinical setting. It is also used to help identify spiritual issues patients face, spiritual distress, and patients’ spiritual resources of strength. The FICA tool has been evaluated in cancer patients. (15) This study suggests FICA is a feasible tool for the clinical assessment of spirituality, and responses to the FICA tool were correlated to many aspects of quality of life. Health care professionals are encouraged not to use the FICA tool as a checklist, but rather to rely on it as a guide to invite the discussion of a patient’s spirituality. F—Faith, Belief, Meaning Do you consider yourself spiritual or religious? Do you have spiritual beliefs, values, or practices that help you cope with stress?*If the patient responds No, the health care provider might ask, What gives your life meaning?** *It is important to contextualize these questions to the reason for the visit—e.g., wellness, stress management, breaking bad news, the end of life. So instead of saying cope with stress you might say that it has helped you in difficult times before. **Meaning might be found in family, career, nature, arts, humanities, or other spiritual, cultural, or religious beliefs and practices. The question What gives your life meaning? should be asked of everyone and not just those who say they are not spiritual. I—Importance and Influence What importance does your faith or belief have in your life? Have your beliefs influenced you in how you handle stress? Do you have specific beliefs that might influence your health care decisions? If so, are you willing to share those with your health care team? C—Community Are you part of a spiritual or religious community?This community can be church, temple, mosque, or like-minded friends, family, etc.Is this of support to you and how? Is there a group of people you really love or who are important to you? A—Address/Action in Care How should I address these issues in your health care?This is also to remind clinicians to develop a plan to address patient spiritual distress or other spiritual issues. More information and educational materials about FICA are available at www.gwish.org/. References Puchalski CM, Ferrell B, Viriani R, et al.: Improving the quality of spiritual care as a dimension of palliative care: Consensus conference report. J Palliat Med 2009;12: 885–903. Puchalski CM, Romer AL: Taking a spiritual history allows clinicians to understand patients more fully. J Palliat Med 2000;3:129–137. Cohen SR, Mount BM, Tomas JJ, Mount LF: Existential well being is an important determinant of quality of life: Evidence from the McGill quality of life questionnaire. Cancer 1996;77:576–586. Gall TL, Comblatt MW: Breast cancer survivors give voice: A qualitative analysis of spiritual factors in long-term adjustment. Psychooncology 2002;11:524–535. George LK, Larson DB, Koenig HG, McCullough ME: Spirituality and health: What we know, what we need to know. J Soc Clin Psychol 2000;19:102–116. Jenkins RA, Pargament KI: Religion and spirituality as resources for coping with cancer. J Psychosocial Oncol 1995; 13:51–74. Koenig HG: A commentary: The role of religion and spirituality at the end of life. Gerontologist 2002;42(suppl 3):20–23. Puchalski CM: Addressing the spiritual needs of patients. Can Treat Research 2008;140:79–91. Tsevat J, Sherman SN, McElwee JA, et al.: The will to live among HIV-infected patients. Ann Int Med 1999;131:194–198. Balboni TA, Vanderwerker LC, Block SD, et al.: Religiousness and spiritual support among advanced cancer patients and associations with end-of-life treatment preferences and quality of life. J Clin Oncol 2007;25:555–560. Delgado-Guay MO, Hui D, Parsons HA, et al.: Spirituality, religiosity, and spiritual pain in advanced cancer patients. J Pain Symptom Manage 2011;41:986–994. Pargament KI: The Psychology of Religion and Coping. New York: Guilford Press, 1997. Balboni T, Balboni M, Paulk, ME, et al.: Support of cancer patients’ spiritual needs and associations with medical care costs at the end of life. Cancer 2011;117:5383–5391. Sulmasy DP: A biopsychosocial-spiritual model for the care of patients at the end of life. Gerontologist 2002;42(spec 3): 24–33. Borneman T, Ferrell B, Puchalski CM: Evaluation of the FICA tool for spiritual assessment. J Pain Symptom Manage 2010;40:163–173. Address correspondence to: Christina M. Puchalski, MD George Washington Institute for Spirituality and Health 2300 K Street NW Warwick Building, Suite 313 Washington, DC 20037 E-mail: cpuchals@gwu.edu DOI: 10.1089/jpm.2013.9457
#275 End-of-Life and Advance Care Planning Considerations for Lesbian, Gay, Bisexual, and Transgender Patients Authors: Andrew Lawton, MD, Jocelyn White, MD, and Erik K. Fromme, MD Background The end-of-life care needs of lesbian, gay, bisexual, and transgender/transsexual (LGBT) patients are in many ways identical to those of non-LGBT patients. However, health care providers should recognize that some unique needs and considerations do exist. This Fast Fact discusses the issues of advance care planning and partner and family involvement as they pertain to LGBT patients. It ends with a discussion about open communication regarding sexual orientation and how this may be facilitated by providers. While there is minimal literature on the end-of life care needs specific to transgender individuals, we feel that the summary and recommendations presented below, though based largely on data regarding lesbian, gay, and bisexual patients, apply to the transgender population as well. Advance Care Planning The inclusion of same-sex partners in decision making and treatment planning has been repeatedly shown to be a priority for LGBT patients facing life-limiting illness. (1) Those who desire their same-sex partner to be their health care representative (‘‘health care power of attorney’’ or ‘‘health care agent/proxy’’) must complete an advance directive (AD) formally making such a designation. Without such documentation, a same-sex partner may have limited or no rights regarding the medical decision making and treatment planning for her or his partner, especially if there has been a history of nonacceptance of the same-sex relationship by the patient’s biological family members. (2,3) One study suggests that while a majority of LGBT patients are knowledgeable about ADs and the appointment of health care proxies, only 49% of those who desire a same-sex partner to be their surrogate decision maker have completed the necessary documentation. (3) Providers are encouraged to educate patients about the importance of completing such documentation, such that their medical and end-of-life wishes may be met. State-specific legal recognition of same-sex marriage is expanding in the United States. However, even legally married LGBT individuals who want their partner to be their surrogate decision maker are still advised to complete a legal AD designating that. For instance, they may be hospitalized while traveling in a state that does not recognize the legality of their marriage. Partner and Family Involvement LGBT patients may receive support from unique social circles, sometimes referred to as ‘‘lavender families’’ or ‘‘families of choice,’’ with whom they find acceptance. Such families may be comprised of heterosexual friends, other members of the LGBT community, co-workers, and biological relatives, all of whom may provide support at the end of life. (2,4) The end of life can be a time of reunion and reconciliation with estranged family and friends, and this may be especially true for LGBT patients who may have experienced isolation from these individuals in the past due to their sexual orientation.2 Providers should be sensitive to the potentially complex family and social dynamics that these reunions can create for both the patient and his or her partner. For instance, a patient’s family may initiate reconciliation with a patient, but in a way that denies the role of the partner or family of choice. Additionally, when such reunions do not occur, feelings of grief, loss, and abandonment experienced by an LGBT individual at the end of life may be magnified. Clinicians may consider inquiring about whether a patient’s biological family knows that a patient’s legally designated surrogate decision maker is the patient’s LGBT partner. Trouble-shooting with the patient on how to proactively communicate this may help avoid conflicts as the patient is actively dying. Partners facing the loss of their same-sex loved one may experience disenfranchised grief—grief that is not acknowledged or viewed as legitimate, owing to the relationship not being fully recognized by one’s family or community. (5,6) Such disenfranchisement may limit the partner’s ability to grieve openly, result in a lack of bereavement support from health care professionals, and augment feelings of isolation. (2,5) Palliative and primary care providers should be sensitive to this when monitoring the grief reaction of a newly widowed partner, and proactively offer bereavement support services as indicated. Discussion of Sexual Orientation The decision of LGBT patients to discuss their sexual orientation with health care providers may be affected by past negative reactions to such disclosure and, in some cases, concerns about discrimination. (1) As sexual orientation is intrinsic to a patient’s social history, its recognition and acceptance by health care providers is essential to the provision of holistic and patient-centered palliative care. Additionally, an appreciation of a patient’s sexuality and sexual orientation is perhaps especially pertinent to end-of-life care, given the importance of assisting patients in life review and reflection. (1) Clinicians should use inclusive language when communicating with all patients. (1) The terms ‘‘significant other’’ or ‘‘partner,’’ for example, are favored over ‘‘husband/wife/spouse,’’ as the latter may not fully reflect the significant relationships in a patient’s life.7 Clinicians should generally use the term, once established, that patients themselves use to describe their significant relationship, e.g., ‘‘boyfriend,’’ ‘‘girlfriend,’’ ‘‘wife,’’ ‘‘husband,’’ ‘‘partner,’’ ‘‘roommate.’’ When inquiring about a patient’s social history and support network, consider asking one or more of the following: Who is family for you? Whom do you most rely on for support? Do you currently have a significant other or partner? These questions avoid assumptions and allow patients to respond openly about their sexual orientation and about those who may play an important role in their end-of-life care. Resources LGBT patients and their health care providers can find more information on advance care planning and other pertinent health care topics at the following websites: National Resource Center On LGBT Aging: www.lgbtagingcenter.org Human Rights Campaign Section on Health & Aging: www.hrc.org/issues/health-and-aging References Harding R, Epiphaniou E, Chidgey-Clark J: Needs, experiences, and preferences of sexual minorities for end-of-life care and palliative care: A systematic review. J Palliat Med 2012; 15:602–611. Rawlings D: End-of-life care considerations for gay, lesbian, bisexual, and transgender individuals. Int J Palliat Nurs 2012; 18:29–34. Stein G, Bonuck KA: Attitudes on end-of-life and advance care planning in the lesbian and gay community. J Palliat Med 2001;4:173–190. Neville S, Henrickson M: The constitution of ‘lavender families:’ A LGB perspective. J Clin Nurs 2009;18:849–856. Cartwright C, Hughes M, Lienert T: End-of-life care for gay, lesbian, bisexual and transgender people. Cult Health Sex 2012;14:537–548. Almack K, Seymour J, Bellamy G: Exploring the impact of sexual orientation on experiences and concerns about end-of life care and on bereavement for lesbian, gay and bisexual older people. Sociology 2010;44:908–924. National Resource Center on LBGT Aging: Inclusive Services for LGBT Older Adults: A Practical Guide To Creating Welcoming Agencies. National Resource Center on LBGT Aging, New York, 2012. www.lgbtagingcenter.org/resources/resource.cfm?r=487. (Last accessed May 2, 2013.) Address correspondence to: Andrew Lawton, MD Oregon Health & Science University 3181 SW Sam Jackson Park Road Mail Code 0930 Portland, OR 97239–3098 E-mail: lawton@ohsu.edu
#276 Targeted Cancer Therapies Part 1 Authors: Helen Gharwan, MD, Dr Sci and Hunter Groninger, MD Background Targeted cancer therapy is an umbrella term for a diverse group of newer antineoplastic agents developed to block the growth and progression of malignant cells by interfering with intracellular pathways responsible for tumor growth. (1) Their use in treating cancer is expanding rapidly, including for patients with far-advanced disease who may not otherwise have been eligible for traditional cytotoxic chemotherapies. (2) This Fast Fact reviews types of targeted cancer therapies and side effects seen with tyrosine kinase inhibitors. Part 2 addresses monoclonal antibody targeted agents. Pharmacology While conventional chemotherapies generally interfere nonselectively with the proliferation of all rapidly dividing cells in the body, targeted agents are meant to block one or more molecules that are essential for the proliferation of cancer cells. They can be categorized into two main groups. Small molecule drugs are primarily tyrosine kinase inhibitors (TKIs). These are orally administered drugs with potential to inhibit various tyrosine kinases (TKs), intracellular enzymes that are mutated or overexpressed in malignant cells.3 TKIs competitively inhibit adenosine triphosphate at the catalytic binding site of the enzymes, compete with the substrate of TKs, or bind at alternative sites and induce a conformational change resulting in inhibition of the enzyme activity. Side effect profiles of the TKIs depend on the roles the individual enzymes play in intracellular signaling and overall cell function. On-target toxicities are related to the primary pharmacological effects of the drugs and occur when TKIs inhibit molecules/pathways that are required for normal function of cells at sites other than the cancer cells; while off-target toxicities are due to secondary pharmacological effects of the drugs and occur when molecules/pathways are inhibited that are not intended to be targeted by the TKI.4 Table 1 summarizes many TKIs’ clinical use and toxicities. Monoclonal antibodies (mAbs) are larger than TKIs and unable to enter cells. They are designed to bind selectively to specific tumor-associated antigens on the surface of cancer cells. MAbs are administered intravenously and can be used either in an unconjugated form or conjugated via a linker to cytotoxic molecules to help enhance their tumor selectivity and their anticancer effect.5 MAbs are more specific than TKIs, but due to their complex development process, more expensive than TKIs. Common side effects of TKIs All TKIs can cause cytopenias and gastrointestinal side effects such as nausea/vomiting.3 Some TKIs cause headaches, muscle cramps, periorbital edema, and induce/worsen symptoms of depression. Since TKIs are teratogenic, female patients of reproductive age should take appropriate measures to prevent pregnancy and/or stop breastfeeding during therapy. Although patients may be evaluated for specific risks prior to therapy (e.g., premorbid cardiovascular disease), no guidelines exist for prophylaxis against TKI toxicities. Side effects should be managed with general symptom management principles.6 Two main classes of side effects are discussed below. Cardiovascular toxicities Mild to moderate hypertension requires only observation. For severe hypertension there are no specific antihypertensive drugs recommended, except that nondihydropyridine calcium channel blockers (e.g., verapamil, diltiazem), which inhibit CYP3A4, should be avoided in conjunction with sunitinib and pazopanib. (7) Left ventricular dysfunction manifestations range from asymptomatic EKG findings to severe congestive heart failure. Predisposing factors include prior anthracycline therapy and TKI-induced hypertension. (8) Pulmonary arterial hypertension (e.g., from dasatinib) is generally reversible with discontinuation. (8) QTc interval prolongation occurs variably; whether this complication is classwide is unknown. Although specific guidelines are lacking, caution is advised in patients with underlying cardiac disease and when other QTc prolonging drugs are administered. (8) Obtaining a baseline EKG is a common, although empiric, practice. Dermatologic toxicities A variety of nonspecific skin toxicities may occur with TKIs, including dry skin, hair color changes, skin discoloration, acral erythema, subungual hemorrhages, an aceiform rash, and hand-foot syndrome (HFS), beginning several weeks after therapy initiation. Prior to initiating therapy, patients are advised to use sunscreens, enhance skin moisturizing, and avoid tight fitting shoes. (9) No specific management guidelines exist for the acneiform rash; expert opinion recommends topical antibiotics (e.g., clindamycin 1% + / - benzoyl peroxide) or oral antibiotics (e.g., tetracycline, minocycline) and continuation of TKI therapy.9 HFS, or palmar-plantar erythrodysesthesia, often arises within the first six weeks of therapy and worsens with continued chemotherapy. (10) HFS usually resolves within two to four weeks of drug therapy interruption, and usually recurs if TKI is introduced at the same dose. Expert opinion suggests National Cancer Institute Grade 1 HFS (erythema without pain) be treated with keratolytics and emollients; Grade 2 HFS (skin changes and/or pain) requires topical corticosteroids and topical or systemic analgesics (including opioids); Grade 3 (ulcerative dermatitis and/or pain impeding function) requires TKI interruption and dose reduction. Other supportive therapies in use—all empiric—include pyridoxine, COX-2 inhibitors, gabapentinoids, systemic corticosteroids, regional cooling, and transdermal nicotine. (10) Table 1. Side Effect Proﬁles of 20 FDA-Approved TKIs to Treat Malignancies (7) Drug Indications Common side effects Serious side effects Comments Axitinib (Inlyta) RCC Hypertension, HFS, diarrhea, nausea, vomiting, transaminitis Hemorrhages, arterial/ venous thrombosis, pulmonary embolism Bosutinib (Bosulif) Philadelphia chromosome positive CML Diarrhea, nausea, vomiting, abdominal pain, skin rash, thrombocytopenia Prolonged QT interval, pericardial/pleural effusion, hepatotoxicity, acute renal failure Cabozantinib (Cometriq) Metastatic medullary thyroid cancer Electrolyte abnormalities (calcium, phosphorus), hypertension, cytopenias, transaminitis, hair color change, fatigue HFS, arterial and venous thromboembolism, cytopenias, gastrointestinal perforation and ﬁstula formation Discontinue drug before elective surgeries or dental procedures Crizotinib (Xalkori) ALK-positive NSCLC Vision disorder, diarrhea, nausea, vomiting, constipation, edema Prolonged QT interval, transaminitis and hepatotoxicity, neutropenia, pulmonary embolism, pneumonitis Dabrafenib (Taﬁnlar) Malignant melanoma with BRAF V600E mutation Hyperglycemia, hypophosphatemia, headache, hyperkeratosis, alopecia, HFS, arthralgias, fever New primary skin cancer (malignant melanoma, squamous cell cancer), pancreatitis, interstitial nephritis Should be taken on an empty stomach Dasatinib (Spycel) Imatinib-resistant CML, Philadelphia chromosome positive acute myelogenous leukemia Body ﬂuid retention, rash, headache, dyspnea, electrolyte abnormalities Congestive heart failure, pericardial/ pleural effusion, prolonged QT interval, hemorrhagic colitis Erlotinib (Tarceva) NSCLC, pancreatic cancer (in combination with gemcitabine) Edema, diarrhea, nausea, vomiting, loss of appetite, abdominal pain, rash, alopecia, cough, depression, fatigue, fever Rash, Stevens-Johnson syndrome, toxic epidermal necrolysis, cardiac dysrhythmia, myocardial infarction, syncope, bowel obstruction, interstitial lung disease, corneal perforation/ ulceration, abnormal eyelash growth Cigarette smoking may require dose adjustment. Increased rash severity has been associated with better drug response and clinical outcome (4) Geﬁtinib (Iressa) NSCLC Acneiform or pustulous rash, folliculitis; paronychial inﬂammation, diarrhea Respiratory compromise (especially in patients with prior chemotherapy or radiation), interstitial lung disease, tumor hemorrhage Coadministration of aspirin reduces the rash. Monitor INR frequently in patients who also take Warfarin Imatinib (Gleevec) GIST, certain types of leukemias Rash, diarrhea, vomiting, arthralgia, edema, headache, weight gain Left ventricular dysfunction, congestive heart failure, cardiac tamponade, cardiogenic shock, gastrointestinal perforation, sensorineural hearing loss, acute respiratory failure, increased intracranial pressure Cardiac complications are usually seen in elderly with preexisting cardiovascular disease Lapatinib (Tykerb) HER-2-positive breast cancer Diarrhea, nausea, vomiting, HFS, rash, anemia, transaminitis, hyperbilirubinemia, fatigue Prolonged QT interval, left ventricular dysfunction, hepatotoxicity, interstitial lung disease Hepatotoxicity may necessitate drug discontinuation Nilotinib (Tasigna) CML Pruritus, night sweats, rash, diarrhea, nausea, vomiting, arthralgias, myalgias, headache, cough, fatigue, alopecia Prolonged QT interval, cytopenias, gastrointestinal hemorrhage, intracranial hemorrhage Must be taken on an empty stomach, as concomitant intake of food may increase the risk of QT prolongation Pazopanib (Votrient) RCC, soft tissue sarcoma Hypertension, changes of hair color, diarrhea, nausea, vomiting, loss of appetite, arthralgias, myalgias, headache, electrolyte abnormalities, dyspnea, fatigue Hemorrhage, hepatotoxicity, congestive heart failure, myocardial infarction, hypothyroidism, reversible posterior leukoencephalopathy syndrome, pneumothorax Cardiovascular and hepatic toxicities are usually seen within the ﬁrst 18 weeks of treatment Ponatinib (Iclusig) TKI-resistant CML, TKI-resistant Philadelphia chromosome positive acute lymphoblastic leukemia Hypertension, abdominal pain, constipation, nausea, headache, fever Arterial and venous thromboembolism, hepatotoxicity, body ﬂuid retention, congestive heart failure, cardiac arrhythmias, myocardial infarction, cytopenias, pancreatitis Coadministration of drugs that increase gastric pH may lead to decreased ponatinib bioavailability and exposure Regorafenib (Stivarga) Colorectal cancer, GIST Hypertension, electrolyte abnormalities, acral erythema, cytopenias, transaminitis, hyperbilirubinemia, difﬁculty speaking, proteinuria, fever Hemorrhage, hepatotoxicity, hypertension, myocardialinfarction, gastrointestinalﬁstula, gastrointestinalperforation Ruxolitinib (Jakaﬁ or Jakavi) Myeloﬁbrosis Contusion, dizziness, headache, anemia, thrombocytopenia Cytopenias; herpes zoster or serious infections may occur Dose adjustment may be required dependent on the platelet count Sorafenib (Nexavar) RCC, hepatocellular cancer Diarrhea, nausea, loss of appetite, abdominal pain, electrolyte abnormalities, fatigue, rash, HFS, alopecia Hemorrhage, congestive heart failure, myocardial infarction, prolongation of QT interval, severe skin reactions Sunitinib (Sutent) RCC, GIST, pancreatic neuroendocrine tumors Diarrhea, nausea, vomiting, loss of appetite, altered taste sensation, yellow skin discoloration, rash, elevation of uric acid, hypothyroidism, cough, fatigue Thrombocytopenia, tumor hemorrhage, prolongation of QT interval, left ventricular dysfunction, tissue necrosis, aseptic necrosis of jaw bone, hemoptysis, hepatotoxicity Hypertension and proteinuria improve with dose reduction or discontinuation of the drug Trametinib (Mekinist) Malignant melanoma with BRAF V600E or V600K mutation Rash, diarrhea, transaminitis, anemia, lymphedema, hypoalbuminemia Cardiomyopathy, hemorrhages, dermatologic toxicities, interstitial lung disease, pneumonitis, visual disturbances Vandetanib (Caprelsa) Medullary thyroid cancer Rash, acne, hypertension, hypocalcemia, transaminitis, headache, fatigue Prolonged QT interval, ischemic stroke, interstitial lung disease, respiratory failure/arrest Coadministration of antiarrhythmic drugs should be avoided Vemurafenib (Zelboraf) Malignant melanoma with BRAF V600E mutation Nausea, arthralgias, alopecia, photosensitivity, pruritus, rash, skin papillomas Squamous cell carcinoma, HFS, prolonged QT interval, ophthalmologic reactions (iritis, photophobia, retinal vein occlusion) References Krause DS, Van Etten RA: Tyrosine kinases as targets for cancer therapy. N Engl J Med 2005;353:172–187. Amir E, Seruga B, Martinez-Lopez J, et al.: Oncogenic targets, magnitude of benefit, and market pricing of antineoplastic drugs. J Clin Oncol 2011;29:2543–2549. Hartmann JT, Haap M, Kopp HG, Lipp HP. Tyrosine kinase inhibitors: A review on pharmacology, metabolism and side effects. Curr Drug Metab 2009;10:470–481. Shah DR, Shah RR, Morganroth J: Tyrosine kinase inhibitors: Their on-target toxicities as potential indicators of efficacy. Drug Saf 2013;36:413–426. Chari RVJ: Targeted cancer therapy: Conferring specificity to cytotoxic drugs. Acc Chem Res 2008;41:98–107. Mendez-Vidal MJ, Ortega EM, Pino AM, Valderrama BP, Vician R: Management of adverse events of targeted therapies in normal and special patients with metastatic renal cell carcinoma. Cancer Metastasis Rev 2012;31:S19–S27. Thomson Reuters (Healthcare): Micromedex Healthcare Series. Greenwood Village, CO: Thomson Reuters (Healthcare). Last accessed August 9, 2013. Shah RR, Morganroth J, Shah DR: Cardiovascular safety of tyrosine kinase inhibitors: With a special focus on cardiac repolarisation (QT Interval). Drug Saf 2013;36: 295–316. Huang X, Patel S, Ahmed N, Seiter K, Liu D: Severe toxicity of skin rash, fever and diarrhea associated with imatinib: Case report and review of skin toxicities associated with tyrosine kinase inhibitors. Drug Des Devel Ther 2009;2:215–219. Lipworth AD, Robert C, Zhu AX: Hand-foot syndrome (handfoot skin reaction, palmar-plantar erythrodysesthesia): Focus on sorafenib and sunitinib. Oncology 2009;77:257–271. Address correspondence to: Hunter Groninger, MD NIH Pain and Palliative Care Service Clinical Research Center Building 10, Room 2-1733 10 Center Drive Bethesda, MD 20892 E-mail: hunter.groninger@nih.gov 240 FAST FACTS AND CONCEPTS
#277 Targeted Cancer Therapies, Part 2 Authors: Shannon Ryan-Cebula MD and Hunter Groninger MD Background Targeted cancer therapy is an umbrella term for a diverse group of newer antineoplastic agents. Fast Fact #276 focused on tyrosine kinase inhibitors (TKIs). This Fast Fact focuses on monoclonal antibodies (mAbs), the second major group of targeted cancer agents. Monoclonal Antibody Development Antibodies are generated from a single clone of immune cells, and are directed against one speciﬁc epitope on the surface of cancer cells. MAbs can be derived from mouse, human, or hybrid elements; newer developments favor human-only in order to minimize antimurine inﬂammatory response by the patient and to maximize target antigen speciﬁcity. (1–4) MAb nomenclature reﬂects its derivation: -omab (entirely murine derived); -ximab (human-murine chimera); - zumab (up to 90% human); -mumab (entirely human). Modes of Action of Monoclonal Antibodies Unlike TKIs, the large size of mAbs necessitates that they have activity on cell surfaces where they can induce immune responses against targeted cancer cells or interfere with proteins necessary for cell growth. Targeted activity may be enhanced by linking ‘‘naked’’ mAbs to other agents, including cytotoxic drugs or radioisotopes. They can be used as single agents, or combined with chemotherapy or hormonal therapy. Side Effects and Complications of mAbs Common side effects of mAbs include allergic reactions, infusion reactions, ﬂu-like symptoms, gastrointestinal dis- tress with nausea, vomiting and/or diarrhea, hypotension, skin rashes, and cytopenias. Premedicating patients with acetaminophen, antihistamines, steroids, and nonsteroidal antiinﬂammatory drugs prior to mAb administration is a standard part of treatment to prevent infusion reactions. (5) Nausea, vomiting, and diarrhea are treated using routine supportive strategies. Important drug-speciﬁc side effects are outlined below (6,7) (see Table 1). Management of Speciﬁc Side Effects Cardiovascular Congestive heart failure (CHF). Monitoring cardiac function by close physical examination, laboratory as- sessment, EKGs, and serial echocardiograms is indi- cated with some of the mAbs (e.g., trastuzumab) and in symptomatic patients. Standard treatment of CHF with ACE inhibitors, beta-blockers, diuretics, and/or aldo- sterone receptor blockers is indicated. A left ventricular ejection fraction below 40% usually precludes starting or continuing many mAbs. Hypertension. As with TKIs, mild to moderate hyper- tension requires only observation. For moderate to severe hypertension, no speciﬁc drug guidelines exist and the hypertension is treated empirically. If hypertension cannot be managed, mAb treatment is discontinued. Thromboembolism. A complication of vascular endo- thelial growth factor (VEGF) mAb therapy (e.g., bev- acizumab), risk factors include age >65 and a history of thromboembolic events. Some clinicians empirically use aspirin to try to prevent thromboembolism. (8) Dermatologic Available studies suggest skin toxicities from epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR) monoclonal antibodies (e.g., panitumumab, cetuximab) are more severe than from TKIs. However, evidence-based prevention or management guidelines do not exist.9Tetracyclines are often employed for management of acneiform rash. Hypersensitivity reactions Immediate discontinuation of the infusion and adminis- tration of oxygen, intravenous normal saline to prevent/treat hypotension, and intravenous antihistamines are indicated. Subcutaneous or intravenous epinephrine, inhaled beta-agonists to address potential bronchospasms, and intravenous cortico- steroids may be required in severe cases or anaphylaxis. Table 1. Side Effect Proﬁles of 12 FDA-Approved mAbs to Treat Malignancies (8,10) Drug Indications Common side effects Serious side effects Target Alemtuzumab (Campath) B-cell CLL Myelosuppression, cytopenias, hypotension, fever, chills Cardiac arrhythmias, cardiomyopathy, CHF, Grave’s dis- ease, CMV and/or EBV infections CD52 on T- and B-lymphocytes Bevacizumab (Avastin) Colorectal, nonsmall cell lung, kidney, ovarian cancers; glioblastoma multiforme Abdominal pain, nau- sea, vomiting, diarrhea, constipation, headaches, hyperten- sion, proteinuria, asthenia, upper respiratory infections Hypertension, thromboembolic events (arterial and venous), hemorrhages, bowel perforation, wound dehiscence VEGF Brentuximab vedotin (Adcetris) Relapsed/refractory Hodgkin’s and ana- plastic large cell lymphomas Sensory neuropathy, cytopenias, diarrhea, nausea, vomiting, rash, cough, fatigue Supraventricular cardiac arrhythmias, pneumonitis, pneumothorax, pulmo- nary embolism, PML CD30; the microtubule disrupting component MMAE binds to tubulin Cetuximab (Erbitux) Metastatic K-Ras negative CRC; squamous cell cancer of head/neck Acneiform rash, alopecia, pruritis; hypomagnesemia; diarrhea, nausea, constipation, insomnia; depression (especially in patients receiving irinotecan) Sudden cardiac death, renal failure, inter- stitial lung disease, pulmonary embolism EGFR Ibritumomab Tiuxetan (Zevalin) Refractory NHL Hypertension, cytopenias, rash, abdominal pain, diarrhea, nausea Severe cytopenia, with hemorrhage, Stevens-Johnson syndrome, toxic epidermal necroly- sis, increased risk of myelodysplasia/ AML CD20: Linked to a radiation chelator (Tiuxetan: binds to Ytrium-90) Ipilimumab (Yervoy) Unresectable or metastatic malignant melanoma Rash, pruritus, diarrhea, fatigue Pericarditis, adrenal insufﬁciency, hypopituitarism, hypothyroidism, intestinal perforation, pneumonitis, Guillain-Barre syndrome CTLA-4 Ofatumumab (Arzerra) Refractory CLL Rash, diarrhea, nausea, anemia, pneumonia, fatigue, fever Bowel obstruction, viral hepatitis, infectious diseases, PML B-lymphocyte antigen CD20 Panitumumab (Vectibix) EGFR-expressingCRC Acneiform rash, pruritis, exfoliative dermatitis, paronychia; hypomagnesemia, hypocalcemia; cough, dyspnea, peripheral edema, fatigue Dermatologic toxicities, interstitial lung disease, pneumonitis, pulmonary ﬁbrosis EGFR Pertuzumab (Perjeta) Metastatic HER2: positive breast cancer, in combination with trastuzumab and docetaxel Alopecia, diarrhea, nausea, vomiting, inﬂammation of mucous membranes, rash, peripheral neuropathy, anemia, fatigue Neutropenias with or without fever, hypersensitivity reactions, left ventricular cardiac dysfunction Extracellular dimerization domain of the HER2 protein. Rituximab (Rituxan) B-cell NHL, CLL Infusion reactions (fever, hypotension, shivering), abdominal pain, diarrhea, nausea, arthralgias, myalgias Cardiac arrhythmias, cardiogenic shock, cytopenias, renal toxicities, angioedema, tumor lysis syndrome CD20 Tositumomab (Bexxar) CD20-positive NHL lymphoma Abdominal pain, nausea, vomiting, hypothyroidism, athenia, headache, cough, fever Cytopenia, increased risk of myelodysplasia/AML, pleural effusions, pneumonia, anaphylaxis CD20: Administered as ‘‘naked’’ mAb followed by mAb linked to the cyto- toxic radioisotope I-131 Trastuzumab (Herceptin, Herclon) HER2/neu overexpressing breast can- cer, some gastric adenocarcinomas Loss of appetite, diarrhea, nausea, vomit- ing, stomatitis, cough, dyspnea, edema Cardiac dysfunction (especially with anthracyclines), respiratory failure, hepatotoxicity Extracellular domain of the HER2 protein AML, acute myeloid leukemia; CLL, chronic lymphocytic leukemia; CMV, cytomegalovirus; CRC, colorectal cancer; CTLA-4, cytotoxic T-lymphocyte-associated antigen 4; EBV, Epstein-Barr virus; EGFR, epidermal growth factor receptor; HER2, human epidermal growth factor receptor 2; MMAE, monomethyl auristatin E; NHL, non-Hodgkin lymphoma; PML, progressive multifocal leukoencephalopathy; VEGF, vascular endothelial growth factor. References Köhler G, Milstein C: Continuous cultures of fused cells secreting antibody of predeﬁned speciﬁcity. Nature 1975;256:495–497. Carter P: Improving the efﬁcacy of antibody-based cancer therapies. Nat Rev Cancer 2001;1:118–129. Beck A, Wurch T, Corvaia N: Therapeutic antibodies and derivatives: From the bench to the clinic. Curr Pharm Biotechnol 2008;9:421–422. Nelson AL, Dhimolea E, Reichert JM: Development trends for human monoclonal antibody therapeutics. Nat Rev Drug Discov 2010;9:767–774. Vultaggio A, Maggi E, Matucci A: Immediate adverse reactions to biologicals: From pathogenic mechanisms to prophylactic management. Curr Opin Allergy Clin Immunol 2011;11:262–268. Klastersky J: Adverse effects of the humanized antibodies used as cancer therapeutics. Curr Op Oncol 2006;18:316–320. Myskowski PL, Halpern AC: Cutaneous adverse reactions to therapeutic monoclonal antibodies for cancer. Curr Allergy Asthma Rep 2008;8:63–68. Svoboda M, Poprach A, Dobes S, Kiss I, Vyzula R: Cardiac toxicity of targeted therapies used in the treatment for solid tumours: A review. Cardiovasc Toxicol 2012;12:191–207. Baas JM, Krens LL, Guchelaar HJ, et al.: Recommendations on management of EGFR inhibitor-induced skin toxicity: A systematic review. Cancer Treat Rev 2012;38: 505–514. Micromedex ® Healthcare Series. Greenwood Village, CO: Thomson Reuters (Healthcare). Address correspondence to: NIH Pain and Palliative Care Service Building 10, Room 2-1733 Hunter Groninger, MD Clinical Research Center 10 Center Drive Bethesda, MD 20892 E-mail: hunter.groninger@nih.gov
#278 Warfarin and Palliative Care Authors: Charles F. von Gunten, MD, PhD, David E. Weissman, MD, and Janet Abrahm, MD Background The number of patients with advanced disease taking warfarin (Coumadin) and receiving specialist palliative care or admitted to hospice care is increasing due to the increased indications for anticoagulation. For many patients the goals of anticoagulation include preventing embolic stroke due to dilated cardiomyopathy, atrial ﬁbrillation, or prosthetic valves until close to the time of death. Most of the medical literature deals with starting warfarin. The online calculators are also tied to this need. None address the management of patients with advanced disease. This Fast Fact reﬂects expert opinion on managing warfarin near the end of life. There is little published discussion about let alone studies of patients on warfarin with advanced complex illnesses typically enrolled in hospice programs. Physiology Vitamin K is an important cofactor in the hepatic synthesis of coagulation proteins. Warfarin inhibits vitamin K epoxide reductase, effectively reducing the amount of active vitamin K in the body. The principle source of vitamin K is ingested food, particularly leafy greens, which is acted upon by intestinal bacteria. Patients who are not eating well generate and absorb less vitamin K and will have a higher international normalized ratio (INR), so will need less warfarin to maintain the same anticoagulant effect. Antibiotics and liver synthetic failure will also raise the INR, requiring warfarin dose reduction. Therefore monitoring the INR is required for patients taking warfarin to prevent an increased risk of bleeding (GI bleed and hemorrhagic stroke). Measurement of Effect An INR of 2–3 is the therapeutic range for most patients. This is a standardized measure of clotting that reﬂects the sum total of all of the clotting factors that are dependent on vitamin K: II, VII, IX, and X, as well as the anticoagulant proteins C and S. The long half-life of about 50 hours (2 days) of prothrombin (factor II) synthesized by the liver means the antithrombotic effect of a changed warfarin dose is not approached until 3 half-lives (5–6 days). Common Error When informed of an INR that is too high or too low, the less informed clinician will change the daily dose of warfarin and ask for a repeat value for the INR in one or two days. If it is too high or too low, the dose is changed again. Since steady state is not reached before the change, a see-saw of increasing and decreasing doses and repeated measurements is a burden to patients and health care professionals and puts the patient at risk from an INR that veers wildly from subtherapeutic to supratherapeutic levels. When to Stop This is a challenging clinical decision. The management of the INR by pharmacists in many settings makes it even more difﬁcult to keep the risks/beneﬁts of warfarin therapy balanced with the clinical assessment of the patient at home. Most experts would agree that the risk of intracranial hemorrhage for a patient taking warfarin who insists on being ambulatory but is wobbly enough to fall is greater than the beneﬁt of preventing embolic stroke. Similarly, when dietary intake drops 50% or more from a usual balanced diet (especially when intake is only favorites like ice cream and not vitamin K rich foods) or when eating is highly erratic, the risk of bleeding escalates exponentially if warfarin dosing continues. No warfarin should be given to the patient who develops liver failure. The patient who does not agree to checking an INR should stop taking warfarin. Finally, all would agree that warfarin therapy should stop when there is frank bleeding. Guidance for Management of Warfarin Dosing in Advanced Disease (Based on Expert Opinion) If the INR is low (<1.5) and appetite same Increase dose by 20% and recheck in one week If the INR is low (<1.5) and appetite is worse Leave dose unchanged and recheck in one week If the INR is between 1.5 and 3.5 Leave dose unchanged If the INR is high (>3.5 but <8) and appetite same Hold one dose and resume at 20% decreased dose If the INR is high (>3.5 but <8) and appetite worse Hold one dose and resume at 50% decreased dose If the INR is very high (>8) Hold warfarin and repeat INR in one week If the INR is high and there is bleeding One dose oral vitamin K; emergent care may be indicated based on severity of the bleeding and patient’s goals of care If the INR is stable and patient stable Check INR monthly INR, international normalized ratio. References British Columbia Medical Services Commission: Warfarin therapy management. National Guideline Clearing House, Agency for Healthcare Research and Quality (AHRQ), Washington, DC. http://www.guideline.gov/content.aspx?id=24513. 2010. Ebell MH: A systematic approach to managing warfarin doses. Fam Pract Manag 2005;12:77–83. Camm JA.: Managing anticoagulation for atrial ﬁbrillation: Current issues and future strategies. J Intern Med 2013; 273:31–41. Lip GYH, Wrigley BJ, Pisters R: Anticoagulation versus placebo for heart failure in sinus rhythm. Cochrane Database Syst Rev 2012;6:CD003336. Charles F. von Gunten, MD, PhD Address correspondence to: Ohiohealth Kobacker House 800 McConnell Drive Columbus, OH 43215 E-mail: Charles.vonGunten@ohiohealth.com
#279 Cannabis for Symptom Control Authors: Shannon Ryan-Cebula MD and Hunter Groninger MD Background The use of cannabis (marijuana) for medical purposes has become legalized in many U.S. states and Canada. This Fast Fact reviews the use of plant-based cannabis preparations to treat symptoms associated with advanced illness. Fast Fact #93 reviewed the use of prescription single molecule cannabinoid medications. Legal Issues A number of countries have implemented pharmacy stocking and dispensing systems for herbal cannabis and/or oral cannabis extracts, available to patients by prescription. Nabiximols (Sativex®), a speciﬁc cannabis extract made by combining liquid CO2 extracts of two strains of herbal cannabis, has been approved for prescription use in multiple countries for a variety of symptom indications. Cannabis is an ‘‘investigational new drug’’ in the United States. It is classiﬁed as a Schedule I controlled substance in the United States, making federally legal prescribed use by patients extremely rare and only under investigational circumstances. In recent decades, however, an increasing number of U.S. states have legalized cannabis for medical use. Since 2012, some states have legalized it for recreational/unrestricted personal use by adults. State medical cannabis programs allow authorized patients to obtain cannabis from dispensaries, and others allow personal or collective cultivation for medicinal use. In all states with the exception of California and Massachusetts, patients who qualify for medical cannabis must have prespeciﬁed chronic, debilitating, or terminal illness diagnoses; however, in no state is cannabis considered an FDA-approved treatment for any medical condition. Providers must be familiar with their own state’s laws and regulatory climate around authorizing cannabis use. (1) Pharmacology There are a large number of cannabis strains used medicinally; each may vary by morphology, odor, and chemotype, producing plant resin with varying ratios of pharmacologically active cannabinoids, principally tetrahydrocannabinol (THC) and cannabidiol (CBD), terpenoids, ﬂavonoids, and other molecules. Although other receptors play a role, the majority of the effects of THC from cannabis are mediated through partial agonism of central and peripheral cannabinoid receptors. (2) Cannabinoid receptors (CB1, CB2) are part of the en- docannabinoid system, a prohomeostatic modulatory system composed of several endogenous ligands. (3) Physiologically, the endocannabinoid signalling system (ECS) has been shown to impact pain perception, movement, appetite, aversive memory extinction, hypothalamic-pituitary-adrenal (stress) axis modulation, immune function, mood, inﬂammation, and others. (4) THC is excreted via both hepatic and renal mecha- nisms. No speciﬁc studies have been done with cannabis-based medicines in patients with signiﬁcant hepatic or renal im- pairment, but it can be expected that effects would be more exaggerated or prolonged in these settings. (5) Given that can- nabinoids are highly protein bound in the plasma, it is unlikely they will be effectively removed by hemodialysis. (6) Dosing Exact dosages depend on individual patient need and tolerance of side effects. Cannabis preparations include resincontaining herbal ﬂowers, which can be heated and delivered to the lungs via inhalation of smoke or vapor, and cannabis-based extracts, which include oral, oromucosal, rectal, and topically delivered preparations in the form of concentrates, suppositories, edibles, and salves. Because cannabinoids are volatile, they will vaporize at a temperature much lower than actual combustion, and can be inhaled without the generation of potentially harmful smoke. (7) Cannabinoids are lipophilic and have nearly immediate onset of action when smoked or vaporized. Vaporization has the advantage of rapid onset of effect and easy dose titration, as the patient can slowly increase use to achieve desired therapeutic effect. Patients can be advised to pause brieﬂy between inhalations to ascertain effectiveness of the medicine and to stop when maximum effect is achieved. Oral ingestion of cannabis products has a delayed onset of action compared to inhalation and titration is more difﬁcult. Maximum cannabinoid blood levels are reached up to six hours post oral ingestion, with a half-life of 20 to 30 hours. (4) Side Effects/Risks Cannabis use can cause xerostomia, palpitations, ﬂushing, nausea, confusion, anxiety, dysphoria, and acute toxic psychosis. Cannabis ingestion raises the risk of a motor vehicle accident. (8) Epidemiological data from nonmedical settings suggest an association between chronic cannabis use history and schizophrenia, but the causal direction of this link has not been established. (9,10) Indications Over the last several decades cannabis and cannabinoid therapeutics have been studied in over 100 controlled clinical trials of varying size and quality, investigating a wide range of conditions. (11) As with the evidence base for most pharmacologic symptom interventions, there are a lack of comparative data between cannabis and other commonly used treatments for example for spasticity or neuropathic pain. Of relevance to palliative care settings, (12–15) cannabis medicines, both orally administered and inhaled, have been shown to have efﬁcacy in randomized, double-blind, placebo-controlled trials (RCT) for a number of symptoms. For cancer pain, a multicenter RCT, involving 360 patients, investigated oral cannabis to treat breakthrough cancer pain in subjects who were started on a long-acting opioid. It showed analgesic efﬁcacy in the low and medium dose ranges, which were also well tolerated. (16) Three RCTs, involving 43 subjects in total, investigating inhaled cannabis for nausea and vomiting secondary to active cancer chemotherapy, demonstrated inhaled cannabis to be an efﬁcacious antiemetic. (17–19) For multiple sclerosis, numerous symptoms—spasticity, both objective and subjectively assessed, spasm frequency, insomnia, pain, as well as impaired mobility—were shown to be improved in a 630-subject multicenter RCT over a 12-month period. (20) Three RCTs of inhaled cannabis involving 107 subjects in total congruently showed efﬁcacy for appetite stimulation and weight gain in patients with AIDS wasting syndromes, (21–23) and two RCTs of inhaled cannabis for painful HIV sensory neuropathy involving 89 subjects in total both showed signiﬁcant analgesic efﬁcacy, (24,25) with a combined number-needed-to-treat of 3.38, superior to all other medications similarly tested for this indication. (26) Three additional RCTs involving 100 subjects in total—of inhaled cannabis for chronic, intractable neuropathic pain due to multiple etiologies—all congruently showed efﬁcacy for smoked and vaporized cannabis. (27–29) References Aggarwal SK, et al.: Clearing the air: What the latest Supreme Court decision regarding medical marijuana really means. Am J Hosp Palliat Care 2005;22:327–329. Russo EB: Taming THC: Potential cannabis synergy and phytocannabinoid-terpenoid entourage effects. Br J Pharmacol 2011;163:1344–1364. Wilson RI, Nicoll RA: Endogenous cannabinoids mediate retrograde signaling at hippocampal synapses. Nature 2001; 410:588–592. Aggarwal SK: Cannabinergic pain medicine: A concise clinical primer and survey of randomized-controlled trial results. Clin J Pain 2013;29:162–171. GW Pharma: Special warnings and precautions for use. In: Summary of Product Characteristics: Sativex Oromucosal Spray. GW Pharma, Wiltshire, England, 2012. Davison SN, et al.: Is there a legitimate role for the therapeutic use of cannabinoids for symptom management in chronic kidney disease? J Pain Symptom Manage 2011;41:768–778. Hazekamp A, Ruhaak R, Zuurman L, van Gerven J, Verpoorte R: Evaluation of a vaporizing device (Volcano) for the pulmonary administration of tetrahydrocannabinol. J Pharm Sci 2006;95:1308–1317. Elvik R: Risk of road accident associated with the use of drugs: A systematic review and meta-analysis of evidence from epidemiological studies. Accid Anal Prev 2013;60:254–267. Advisory Council on the Misuse of Drugs: Further consideration of the classiﬁcation of cannabis under the Misuse of Drugs Act 1971. London: Home Ofﬁce, 2005. Advisory Council on the Misuse of Drugs: Cannabis: Classiﬁcation and public health. London: Home Ofﬁce, 2008. Hazekamp A, Grotenhermen F: Review on clinical studies with cannabis and cannabinoids 2005–2009. Cannabinoids 2010;5:1–21. Carter GT, et al.: Cannabis in palliative medicine: Improving care and reducing opioid-related morbidity. Am J Hosp Palliat Care 2011;28:297–303. Shaiova L, et al.: Cancer pain: Principles of assessment and syndromes. In: Berger AM, Shuster JL, Von Roenn JH (eds): Principles and Practice of Palliative Care and Supportive Oncology, 4th ed. Philadelphia, PA. Lippincott Williams & Wilkins, 2013. Aggarwal SK, et al.: Characteristics of patients with chronic pain accessing treatment with medical cannabis in Washington State. J Opioid Manag 2009;5:257–286. Aggarwal SK, et al.: Prospectively surveying health-related quality of life and symptom relief in a lot-based sample of medical cannabis-using patients in urban Washington State reveals managed chronic illness and debility. Am J Hosp Palliat Care 2013;30:523–531. Portenoy RK, et al.: Nabiximols for opioid-treated cancer patients with poorly-controlled chronic pain: A randomized, placebo-controlled, graded-dose trial. J Pain 2012;13: 438–449. Chang AE, et al.: Delta-9-tetrahydrocannabinol as an an- tiemetic in cancer patients receiving high-dose methotrexate: A prospective, randomized evaluation. Ann Intern Med 1979;91:819–824. Chang AE, et al.: A prospective evaluation of delta-9-tetrahydrocannabinol as an antiemetic in patients receiving adriamycin and cytoxan chemotherapy. Cancer 1981;47: 1746–1751. Levitt M, et al.: Randomized double-blind comparison of delta-9-tetrahydrocannabinol and marijuana as chemotherapy antiemetics. Proc Am Soc Clin Oncol 1984;3:91(abstr C-354). Zajicek J, et al.: Cannabinoids in multiple sclerosis (CAMS) study: Safety and efﬁcacy data for 12 months follow up. J Neurol Neurosurg Psychiatry 2005;76:1664–1669. Abrams DI, et al.: Short-term effects of cannabinoids in patients with HIV-1 infection. Ann Intern Med 2003;139:258–266. Haney M, et al.: Dronabinol and marijuana in HIV+ marijuana smokers: Acute effects on caloric intake and mood. Psychopharmacology 2005;181:170–178. Haney M, et al.: Dronabinol and marijuana in HIV-positive marijuana smokers. J Acquir Immune Deﬁc Syndr 2007;45: 545–554. Abrams DI, et al.: Cannabis in painful HIV-associated sensory neuropathy. Neurology 2007; 68:515–521. Ellis RJ, et al.: Smoked medicinal cannabis for neuropathic pain in HIV: A randomized, crossover clinical trial. Neuropsychopharmacology 2009;34:672–680. Phillip TJ, et al.: Pharmacological treatment of painful HIV-associated sensory neuropathy: A systematic review and meta-analysis of randomised controlled trials. PLoS One 2010;5:e14433. Wilsey B, et al.: A randomized, placebo-controlled crossover trial of cannabis cigarettes in neuropathic pain. J Pain 2008;9:506–521. Ware MA, et al.: Smoked cannabis for chronic neuropathic pain: A randomized controlled trial. CMAJ 2010;182: E694–E701. Wilsey B, et al.: Low-dose vaporized cannabis signiﬁcantly improves neuropathic pain. J Pain 2013;14:136–148. Department of Physical Medicine and Rehabilitation Address correspondence to: Sunil K. Aggarwal, MD, PhD New York University 15th Floor, Room 15-82 New York, NY 10016 E-mail: humansunil@gmail.com 240 East 38th Street